Pause for Thought
Have you noticed that Psalm 2 ends where Psalm 1 begins, with blessing pronounced on the
individual described in 1:1, and on all those described in 2:12? This has the effect of bracketing
the two psalms together. They appear very different but, guided by this bracketing, we find
them complementary. Psalm 1:1 describes the blessed way of life. This individual lives by
distinctive directives (‘advice’), distinctive principles (‘takes his stand’) and distinctive settled
convictions (‘sit’). Psalm 2:12 focuses on a special relationship, in this case with the anointed
One, the Lord’s Son: personal devotion (‘kiss, compare, 1 Kings 19:18), and trustful reliance
(‘seek refuge’). Secondly, each psalm speaks in its own way of what Psalm 1:3 calls the
transplanted life. Neither the individual of Psalm 1 nor the ‘all’ of Psalm 2:12 are where they
once were; there has been a great change, the acquisition of a new position. In Psalm 1, new
life comes from life-giving waters; in Psalm 2, an erstwhile ‘king’ has submitted to the Lorp’s
King who reigns on Zion. Psalm 87 describes this as acquiring new citizenship (compare
Philippians 3:20), and therefore new possibilities, resources and privileges. Thirdly, in each
case, the newness of position and life has come about through heeding the Word of God. The
Lorp’s Word came to the ‘kings of the earth’ (2:2) that their rebellion was hopeless because
his King was already in office on Zion (2:6) — a word confirmed by the testimony of the
Son that, by the Father’s decree, it was his right to possess and rule the earth to its uttermost
boundaries (2:8—9). In Psalm 1:2—3 the waters that refresh and renew the transplanted tree
are consequent on delighting in and pondering the Lord’s teaching. The heart of Psalm 2
is fulfilled in the reign of Jesus, the Lorp’s King, in the present (Hebrews 12:22—24) and
the eternal Zion (Revelation 22:10, 22—27; 22:1); the heart of Psalm 1 is fulfilled in the
Lord’s provision of the completed, inspired Scripture (2 Timothy 3:10—17); the heart of the
spiritual life, Psalms teaches, lies in our devotion (2:12a) and constant resorting (2:12b) to
the Lord Jesus, and in our assiduous attention to the Word of God (1:2).
33 ‘Fear ... trembling’: the joy of salvation is ever aware of personal lack of merit, the greatness of divine mercy and the
unabated holiness of God. Ponder ‘it may be’ (Nrv, ‘perhaps’) in Zephaniah 2:3; compare Exodus 20:20.
34 See above v. 5.
35 The Hebrew has no preposition governing ‘way’. It could be ‘on your way’: as you go blithely on (compare Matthew
5:25). ‘For your way’ means ‘in retribution for your unchanged life-style’.
36 See Psalm 1:1.
14 Day 1 — Psatms 1-2


Pause for Thought
Whether Psalms 3—7 all belong in the time of Absalom’s rebellion must be (apart from
Psalm 3) to an extent a conjecture. What cannot be denied is that they all arise from a time
(or times) of hostility. The comparatively buoyant spirit of Psalms 3 and 4 becomes a much
sharper sense of enmity in Psalm 5, with a clearer awareness of the wickedness which David
was facing. Next comes the ‘terror’ of 6:2, 3, 10, and, finally, the solemn sense of divine
judgment — and eternal judgment — which pre-occupies Psalm 7. Psalms, indeed, for a time
of trouble — and full of lessons for any and every troubled soul. A very fundamental lesson
emerges from a simple observation. Of the fifty-five verses in these psalms, about fifteen
are devoted to enemies and their threat, but about thirty to truths, thoughts of God and
descriptions of prayer and praise. In whatever form trouble comes — the hostility of others,
circumstantial problems and tragedies, personal sorrows — its tendency is to drive us inward,
to make us ‘retire hurt’, urge us to find some corner in which to moan over our lot, marvel
how unfair life is, ‘chew the fat’ of our own misery! David is too practical to say ‘forget
your problems’. Neither his nor our difficulties are negligible or inconsequential. No, don’t
try to forget them, but rather face and describe them — as these psalms do. The vague is so
often more alarming than what is candidly and specifically faced. But always outweigh the
problems, hurts, sorrows — whatever — by the great truths about the Lord, and by the practice
of prayer and praise. See how our psalms begin: ‘Yahweh’ (3); ‘God of my righteousness’ (4);
‘Hear ... Yahweh’ (5); “Yahweh’ (6); “Yahweh my God’ (7). Look again at the truths shared
in Psalm 4: the God who answers prayer (verse 1); who sets apart those he loves, protectingly
(verse 3); gives a greater joy than earth affords (verse 7); and who keeps us in security and
peace (verse 8). The mind stocked with truth is the mind fortified.
24 Day 2 — PsaLMs 3-7


Pause for Thought
Think of the contrast between a quiet night-time stroll in your garden and the bustle and
demands of a busy, stressful day in your office, and you have exactly the contrast between
Psalm 8 and Psalms 9-10! Psalm 8 is a worshipful meditation on the night sky; Psalm 9-10
(as originally one) is alive with the pressures, acrimonious words and hostile deeds of an
unsympathetic world. There you are! Take them together, and we all say, Yes, life’s like that!
But what are Psalm 8 and Psalm 9-10 saying to us in our mixed up existence?
Like all prayer, worship involves talking to God. Psalm 8 is not sitting in the silent
contemplation of wordless adoration; it is telling God about God. The emphasis (because it
comes twice in verses 1 and 9) tells him that he is God our deliverer and redeemer, Yahweh,
the God of Exodus 3:15 and 6:7. He is also the sovereign God — not a passive, ornamental
Sovereign, but the active, executive, managing director, controller and detailed planner of
his world, in all its aspects and activities. He is a God who is truly God. Thirdly, he is the
one and only God of all the earth — not in whatever nature any given nation or society may
design him, but according to his ‘name’, that is, the way he has revealed himself. There is no
God except the God of the Bible!
Jehovah, great I AM,
by earth and heaven confessed;
I bow and bless the sacred Name.
The fourth component of worship in Psalm 8 is a properly lowly estimate of ourselves, a deep,
prevailing ‘wonderment’ that such a God concerns himself with such as me. By contrast,
Psalm 9-10 teaches us about the sort of prayer that arms us to face the pressures of life with
calm assurance. It is God-conscious prayer (9:1—2; 10:16-18; see how the psalm opens and
closes), with a clear awareness of him to whom we are praying (9:9-10), and sounding a note
of praise (9:11). It is ‘count your blessings’ praying, taking in God’s ‘wonderful works’ (9:11—
12) and past mercies. Prayer is need expressed in detail (10:3-11), and can be couched in
vigorous words both to God (9:19; 10:12), and regarding man (10:14—15). The reverence of
true worship guards our freedom of speech in prayer from unseemly familiarity; the activity
of praise and intercession guards our worship from impractical pietism.
52 Day 3 — PsaLms 8-10


Pause for Thought
Periods of anxiety are something we all have to learn to deal with, and Psalm 13, for all its
brevity, is a marvellous instruction. First, there are three areas of experience from which
troubling worries may arise — the spiritual (verse 1), the personal (verse 2a), and the circumstantial (verse 2b). The first (meriting two cries of ‘how long?’) is given prominence. We
know beyond question that Yahweh will never forget us, but the plaguing thought arises that
maybe our sins and failures have so alienated him that he has withdrawn his favour (verse 1b).
Even those who never entertained such a thought can well imagine its anguish. “Grief in the
heart’ is something to be watched like a hawk. It is the tendency to retire into a corner and
talk to ourselves about ourselves! It can only further focus attention on our miseries! The
verses of Psalm 13:3-4, so to say, begin the real ‘fight back’ against the pressing anxieties.
‘Answer’ (3a) is asking Yahweh to break silence and come back into my life; ‘enlighten’ seeks
personal relief from agony of soul, not by looking inwardly but by turning upwardly. The
three ‘in cases raise disagreeable possibilities: that we should end this life under the cloud of
apparent divine displeasure (3c), that the enemy should come out on the winning side (4a),
and that, under all this anxiety, I might ‘let the side down’ by ‘slipping’ (4b). Now we come to
what David proposes as the real winning reaction (verses S—6). Notice how four ‘how longs
(verses 1-2) were followed by three ‘in cases’ (verses 3-4), and now by two exultations (verses
5—6). By progressively narrowing its focus in this way, the Psalm lays a sharp emphasis on
the last two verses — the delight and the song that follow from taking the nature of Yahweh's
love into account and adopting a clear position of trust. In verse 5, his love is chesedh, not
a potentially fleeting emotion, perhaps dependant on favourable conditions on our side of
the relationship. No, it is love arising from a determination and unchangeable disposition
of Yahweh's will — the love he expressed to us, his bride, when in return to the question,
“Will you love her?” he replied ‘I will’. In the light of that love, thoughts of forgetfulness
and the hidden face evaporate. The only response is to reply to very questioning thought or
experience: I trust him! And to make that reply as each day starts, and, if necessary, moment
by moment throughout the day.
38 Day 4 — PsaLMs 11-14


Pause for Thought
What do you make of Psalm 15? It sounds dreadfully like salvation by works, doesn't it?
And commentators do not help when they describe it (as many do) as ‘an entrance liturgy’:
someone comes seeking entrance, and in response to questions from the Gatekeeper lists
his qualifications for being allowed in! But look again at verse 1. The point at issue is not
entrance but residence, not being allowed in but being welcome to stay — as the invited
guest and the accepted resident. Which is exactly what we who trust in Jesus are. We are in
the kingdom of God not by nature but by grace; not by our initiative but by his invitation;
accepted not by merit but ‘in the Beloved’ (Ephesians 1:6; Colossians 1:12—13). The topic the
psalm addresses, then, is this: what should our lives look like now that we are on the inside?
And the picture it paints is searching in the extreme. In general it spells out the abiding
requirement (Leviticus 19:2) that ‘You shall be holy, for I, Yahweh your God, am holy’:
holiness of life and conduct (verses 2a—b; compare Matthew 5:48; 1 John 2:1a); controlled,
pure speech, in both heart and tongue (verses 2c, 3a; compare 1 Peter 3:10—12; Ephesians
4:25, 29; 5:4; Colossians 3:9); wholesome relationships, whether regarding another's welfare
(verse 3b), or their reputation (verse 3c; compare Leviticus 19:18; Luke 10:29—36). “Love
your neighbour as yourself’ means ‘exactly like you love yourself’, with the love that exercises
care and meets needs — even on days when we ‘hate’ ourselves! In social values, love means
to side with everything that promotes sound morality and goodness, and always to identify
with the Lorp’s people (verse 4a—b; compare 2 Chronicles 19:2; Proverbs 22:24; 2 Timothy
2:19-22). It means keeping one’s promises (verse 4c, see note 8 above). And, not least, how
we manage our money, never to allow it to become a minister to greed or a justification for
injuring someone else (verse 5; compare Proverbs 15:27; 28:20; Luke 16:13; 1 Timothy
6:9-10). It’s a tall order, to be sure, but, says verse 5c, the result is something to covet —
stability and consistency.
44 Day 5 — PsaLMs 15-17


Pause for Thought
So David finally came to the place of song — as the heading of Psalm 18 informs us. But, my
word, it took time! We are not told how many years lay between his anointing (1 Samuel 16)
and his initial acceptance as king of Judah (2 Samuel 2), and doubtless there were golden
moments, as he basked in the loyalty of his men, rejoiced in the deliverances of Yahweh, or
revelled in his new marriage to Abigail, but for the most part they were years of danger and
toil, years in which David exchanged the luxuries of Saul’s palace for the hardships of a cave
dweller. Yet this was the man upon whom ‘the Spirit of the Lorp came ... from that day
forward’ (1 Samuel 16:13). For the most part, the Holy Spirit in the Old Testament comes as
an occasional ‘filling’ to a particular person for a particular task — corresponding to the filling
with the Spirit in the New Testament, where Peter, for example, was filled with the Spirit on
at last three occasions to cater for some special situation, but it was different for David. In
his case, the Holy Spirit was a constant presence and reality. David’s initial experience as a
Spirit-endowed man — the former Shepherd is introduced into the royal court and becomes
the King’s favourite — prompts us readers to nod wisely. This is what we would logically
expect — Saul’s anointed successor is moving towards his destiny. But then everything goes
wrong! Royal favour becomes jealousy; jealousy becomes murderous hate; David takes to
his heels and to the hills! Not because the Holy Spirit was withdrawn, but because he was
there, shaping everything according to the will of God. We forget all this to our cost. It is
always the same, because it has to be so. The Spirit and the flesh are at war (Galatians 5:17);
‘through much tribulation’ we enter God’s kingdom (Acts 14:22). No sooner was the Lord
Jesus anointed with the Spirit at his baptism, and assured of his divine Sonship, than he
was led by that same Spirit into the wilderness to be tempted by the devil (Matthew 4:1).
The Holy Spirit and conflict belong together. David needed that his hand be taught for war
(Psalm 18:34); he needed to bend a bow of bronze (verse 34); he needed that his feet be like
a deer (verse 33) if he was ever to attain his destined high places. And for all this Yahweh was
his teacher, his strength and his enabler.
50 Day 6 — Psatm 18


Pause for Thought
The trouble with the silent voice of creation (Psalm 19) is that it ‘says’ so many different
things! On the one hand there is the sentiment that ‘one is nearer God’s heart in a garden
than anywhere else on earth’, and this can be extended to so many other experiences: the
astonishing beauty of the sky at sunset, the grandeur of a mountain landscape. But I don't
know of a poem that says ‘one is nearer God’s heart in an earthquake than anywhere else on
earth’. It is exactly the same length of line; it scans properly; and it accords with the biblical
assertion that ‘the earth is the Lorp’s’ (Psalm 24:1) — not just the ‘nice’ bits but the whole,
the rough bits too. Indeed, we would be in a disastrously poor way if the Lord God Almighty
were ‘there’ only in fair weather and not in foul! So then, as we listen to the unspeaking ‘voice’
of the natural world, we ‘hear’ a confused babble, a question rather than an answer: what is
the Creator ‘really’ like? It’s time, then, that Isaac Watts taught us to sing a different song:
The heavens declare thy glory, Lord;
In every star thy wisdom shines.
But when our eyes behold thy Word,
We read thy name in fairer lines.
How exact that is! ‘Glory’ shines in the created order: the glory of beauty; the glory of
beneficence; yes, and the glory of awe-inspiring, terrifying forces! But the Word of God
tells us Ais name, who he is. The One who is God, in all the multiplicity of ways his creation
reveals, is, at heart, in his central, personal essence, Yahweh, the God of grace, the God who
hears and acts, the God of our salvation. He is the God of the Word of God, and, like the
Word he speaks, a God reviving the soul, making wise, bringing joy, illuminating; indeed, all
righteous, but golden in grace, and honey to those who taste and see that Yahweh is gracious
(Psalm 34:8).
56 Day 7 — PsaLMs 19-21


Pause for Thought
The two psalms read today provide a striking contrast between the holy and the homely.
Psalm 22 is such holy ground that we take off our shoes and walk with careful, even hesitant
steps. More than any other passage of Scripture it penetrates into the actual suffering of
our crucified Lord: the pierced hands and feet, the body itself agonizingly pulled apart, the
racking thirst, the mocking onlookers. Thank God for the reticence of the Gospel accounts:
truly ‘we may not know, we cannot tell/ what pains He had to bear’. Psalm 22 presses to the
limit of what Scripture allows, and we do well to read it sparingly and with awe. We are faceto-face with the sheer reality of divine inspiration, for, 1000 years before the event, David not
only foresaw suffering, but the suffering of the Crucified. We marvel as well as tremble. This
is the unique miracle of Holy Scripture. We worship the Lord our God both for the extremity
he suffered for us, and for the book he has written for our learning. But — and here is a lovely
thing — the homely Psalm 23 is equally true! It can be seen (as we have noted) as a threefold
picture. Now note that each picture — Shepherd, Companion, Host — asserts a truth: for the
continuous present, as long as this life lasts, shepherding care guarantees that ‘I will not lack’.
This is the Shepherd’s responsibility and since he will not fail neither will the supply! For
the adversities and threats of life, ‘I will not fear evil’. However black the next stretch of the
journey through the valley may seem, verse 4 changes from the ‘he’ of shepherd-leadership
(verse 3) to the ‘you’ of side-by-side companionship: ‘My Shepherd is beside me.’ But now,
the Bible dares to go the further step: what of eternity? Verse 6 traces the pathway forward:
‘all the days of my life’ are catered for by goodness and committed love, and then there awaits
the great return, ‘I will return to Yahweh's house for ever’, for the endlessly prolonged ‘days’
of eternal life.
Day 8 — PsaLMs 22-23 61

Pause for Thought
Alongside Psalm 24, Psalm 25 is profoundly comforting. Psalm 24:3—4 is the Old Testament
counterpart of Hebrews 12:4. To take our stand in the presence of God, we must be holy
as he is. It has always been so (Leviticus 19:2), and always will be so (Revelation 21:27).
But, if we are thinking of parallels between the Testaments, then the reference in Revelation
21:27 to the Lamb's book of life is a blessed and comforting recollection of the balancing
truths of Psalm 25. The holy God, who insists on his holiness as the standard, is also the
forgiving God. This means that he always has other things in mind than just our sinfulness
and unworthiness. According to 25:6—7, he can look back over our sin-stained past and
forget what he has seen! But, compared with what he banishes from mind and memory, three
things are permanent: ‘compassion’ (his ‘passionate love’), his solemnly ‘committed love’, and
his ‘goodness’. He never looks at us saving through these three ‘windows’; indeed, says the
remarkable verse 8, it is actually because (‘therefore’) he is good and upright that he bothers
with sinners so as to lead and teach us. How good is that! Using the great, comprehensive
word ‘holy’, we rightly tremble at the thought of standing before the holy God, and then,
reading 25:8, we can say that it is because he is holy that he bothers! Verse 11 puts the same
truth in another way: it is ‘for his name’s sake’ — that is to say, because he is what he is;
because his ‘name’ is an accurate shorthand for his revealed nature, he pardons my iniquity,
great as it is. But look, too, at the matching truth in verse 16. In verse 11 we appeal to him
on the ground of what he is; in verse 16 we can appeal to him on the ground of what we
are, bereft and downtrodden. The recurring thought in Psalm 25 is its encouragement to
‘wait on the Lord’, bringing confidence (verse 3), concentrating on divine teaching (verse 5),
summoning to holiness (verse 21).
66 Day 9 — PsaLMs 24-25


Pause for Thought
Very central to the Old Testament is the thought of Yahweh's ‘house’. It is one of the links
between our three psalms: 26:8 has ‘dwelling place’, ‘abode’, ‘house’; 27:4—5, ‘house’,
‘temple’, ‘booth’, ‘tent’; 28:2, ‘inner shrine’. Each word has its own significance to share, but
together they express in common the one privileged thought that Yahweh actually ‘localised’
himself in an earthly address. Our churches are places to which we go to be with him; his
‘house’ was a place to which he came in order to be with us. Sometimes some of our English
Bibles represent ‘house’ by ‘temple’. This is very wrong, destroying the beautiful truth of the
God who comes to live at the heart of his people’s life. “Tent’ looks back to the wilderness
days when Israel were a camping people, and the Lorn in effect said: If you are camping,
I want to camp too! Read Numbers 2 and arrange the lines of Israel’s tents like a great cross,
with the Lorp’s tent — the “Tabernacle’ — placed at the crossing. Doesn't that express visually
the reality intended: Yahweh, the indwelling God, at the very heart of his people? Look at
Psalm 34:7, the Angel of the Lorp in a mobile home so that he is always free to move with
his people. The use of ‘booth’ develops the idea of the sharing God. When Israel kept ‘the
feast of booths’, they actually lived in makeshift shelters of branches of trees, to remind them
of their travelling days: that they were travellers because they had been redeemed by Yahweh
at the Exodus; that Egypt and bondage were behind them for ever; and that, however flimsy
their dwelling places, they were safe and provided for in his keeping. And now, living in
his own ‘booth’, he actually shares their hardships, their vulnerability. When his dwelling is
called a ‘temple’ we are reminded that the reality of his presence among us is a call to worship.
In the same spirit, his ‘house’ is where his glory dwells (26:8) — the unapproachable glory of
Exodus 40:35 — and his ‘inner shrine’ is ‘the shrine of his holiness’ (28:2). The homeliness of
Yahweh taking an earthly address, and the intimacy of his actually coming to live among his
people, must never degenerate into casualness. He is with us in all his glory; in the fullness of
his holiness. The place on which we stand is holy ground, and without the precious blood of atonement we dare not enter his presence.
72, Day 10 — PSALMs 26-28

Pause for Thought
The revelation of God in the Bible is full of contrasts, and one of our greatest mistakes (and
temptations) is to try to reduce the number of such contrasts so as to bring the great God
of Scripture within the confines of what our logic can manage. We saw something of this
in our thoughts about Psalm 19 — how it is easy to think of God’s heart in a garden but not
so easy in an earthquake! The Bible will not let us off that hook — and how glad we should
be that it does not. We would indeed be in queer street if the Lorp God was not in charge
when the sun goes in and the clouds threaten. That is exactly where today’s readings come
in. In Psalm 29 David’s marvellous poetic gift watches the storm sweeping in from the sea,
marching spectacularly down the country, causing havoc: trees crashing down, open country
devastated. In Yahweh's temple there is only one word, maybe shouted in exultation; maybe
whispered in awe: ‘Glory! Yahweh in all his glory is in the storm. But now review the four
sections of Psalm 31. It is Yahweh’s eye that is expected to note who, in all the flux of earthly
life, is right with him and acting in righteousness, and who is wicked, arrogant, beyond the
beyonds. It is Yahweh who is expected to apportion due reward, up to the utmost degree of
requital to those who act in arrogance. In other words, here is detailed sovereign rule over the
world of moral choices, moral consequences; here is a God who searches and knows hearts,
motives, intentions, outcomes. He is there in all his glory in the broad sweep of the storm; he
is there in all his glory as the searcher of hearts. He is there when the storm brings disruption;
he is there as the enforcer of moral order. He is there in macromanagement; he is there in
micromanagement. He is God!

80 Day 12 — PsaLMs 32-33


Pause for Thought
Psalm 32 achieves no mean feat by alerting us — dramatically — to the seriousness of sin. Even
though it is, in fact, the least aspect of the problem of sin, the psalm underlines the personal
pity of it all. Sin burdens, diminishes and blights the life of the sinner (verses 3-4). It may
not be felt but in fact it is like carrying around a sack of sand. Proverbs 7:23 says sexual
promiscuity is the equivalent of being shot in the liver by an arrow! Paul (1 Corinthians 6:18)
teaches that the adulterer sins against his own body! Not, we might say, the common view,
but exactly what Psalm 32 implies about David’s ‘roaring’. Then at a deeper level is the
alienation and hostility of God, whose hand goes out heavily against the sinner. We need to
take this on board. David is writing as a believer and of a believer's sins. The hurt done to our
holy God alienates him, grieves his Holy Spirit (Ephesians 4:30), and leaves us diminished
— vitality turned to aridity. ‘Flee childish lusts’ counsels Paul (2 Timothy 2:22); ‘follow
righteousness. What a relief, then, to note the miracle (no less) of repentance (Psalm 32:5).
The sheer simplicity of it! ‘I let you know ... you forgave.’ Yes, even though he alone knows
‘the iniquity of my sin’ — ‘my sin in iniquity!’ See the same thought in Psalm 51:1—3 (note
‘because’) — and the very incident recorded in 2 Samuel 12:13. This simplicity of dealing
with sin by repentance is made possible through substitution. The principle of one standing
in the place of another goes back at least as far as Abraham: recall how, without instruction,
he knew he could kill the ram ‘in the place of his son’ (Genesis 22:13). The same principle
pervades the levitical sacrifices — everywhere we read of the sinner laying his hand on the
sacrifice (e.g. Leviticus 1:4). He is enacting on a personal level what the High Priest did
nationally in Leviticus 16:21—22: transferring sin in all its penalties to another, appointing a
substitute. Isaiah foresaw that ultimately only a Person could be a true substitute for persons
(53:4-6), foreshadowing Jesus, when
In my place, condemned he stood;
Sealed my pardon in his blood.
In this way (Psalm 32:1), sin is ‘covered’ — not by being hidden out of sight but as a debt is ‘covered’ by the price which pays for it. Wonder of all wonders, my sin is no longer put to
my account, but is ‘imputed’ (Psalm 32:2) to Another.
84 Day 12 — PsaLMs 32-33


Pause for Thought
The heading throws an interesting light on Psalm 34. It agrees with 1 Samuel in attributing
David’s escape from the Philistines to his clever stratagem of pretending to be deranged.
In this it contrasts sharply with content of the psalm, but in a way which is both easy and
fascinating to explain. One does not need much imagination to think what a good story
David would have made of his pretended loopiness, and how he fooled his way out of danger
in Gath. So think of him recounting his cleverness yet once more, when suddenly it came over
him that in fact there was a ‘real’ story hidden inside the ‘good’ story — a real story of prayer
made and prayer answered. Yes, he had played the madman, yes he had written up insulting
graffiti about Achish on the doors, yes he had made his personal behaviour unacceptable, but
he had also prayed, he had also looked ceaselessly to Yahweh. He had looked, he had cried
out, he had found his God to be near at hand in the hour of terror — and wasn’t that the real
story? Wasn't that what he ought to be telling his friends? Not boosting his own cleverness
but boasting and rejoicing confidently in his saving, delivering God? Did he suddenly stop
telling the tale, and say ‘Please excuse me’ and slip off to some solitary place where he could
write what we call Psalm 34? There is no situation where we cannot ‘bless Yahweh’ (verse
1), for ‘blessing him’ means dwelling on his unchanging glories and excellencies, and they
remain the same no matter how dark the earthly scene. There is no situation from which the
‘downtrodden’ — those at the bottom of life's heap — cannot cry out and be heard, because
Yahweh's eye never flickers from watching over his servants, his ear is ever open to their cry
(15-16). There is no situation where he is anything but ‘near’ (18), with his mobile home
pitched alongside so as always to be with us (7). There is no situation where his face is not set
against our adversaries to cut them down (16). The life-changing way is to look to him (5),
to taste the sweet savour of his goodness (8), to
Fear him, ye saints, and you will then
Have nothing else to fear ...
‘The story within the story is the one to listen to, and it is written for our learning in Psalm 34.
88 Day 13 — PsaLm 34


Pause for Thought
Right through Psalm 35 runs a very practical truth — what actually to do during a difficult
patch of life. It makes no difference whether the difficulty arises from people, circumstances
or within our own natures, Psalm 35 has a programme for us. Take first what lies at the
heart of the psalm and is also probably the hardest piece of its guidance: wait patiently and
trustfully for the Lorp’s timing. It may seem prolonged to us, and it is permitted to cry out
‘How long?’ (verse17), provided the cry is made in faith and not in criticism. Timetabling is
one of the major ways our thoughts are not his thoughts (Isaiah 55:8), but he always knows
exactly what he is doing; the when, where and how have been in his mind since all eternity;
all is well. We used to sing the hymn,
‘Hold the fort, for I am coming,’
Jesus signals still.
Wave the answer back to heaven,
‘By thy grace, we will!”
This rule is always the same. Then, secondly, Psalm 35:5—6 teaches us that it is actually in the
very nature of our God to deal with our foes. It is not just something he does from time to
time: it belongs in his nature; it is part of what he is. We met the Angel in Psalm 34:7 where
he was living in a mobile home so that he is always alongside, at the ready, to move when
we move. Now we learn that he is active to chase and pursue. Remember that the Angel is
Jesus in the fullness of his deity as Son of God, in the fullness of his distinctiveness as Son of
man, always with us (Matthew 28:20), never leaving or forsaking (Hebrews 13:5), constantly
holding John 10:28—29). Finally, we have the resource of prayer, telling Yahweh, knowing
that he is himself the counterweight to everything the enemy can do. They gloat hurtfully
even though falsely, “We saw it’; but we can take the matter at once, calmly, to Yahweh: “You
saw it’ (Psalm 35:23). Our counter-attack is to bring him in on our side, and to ask for his
active engagement in the battle (verse 23). This is the recipe, then, for the troubled day:
waiting with believing patience; watching out for the Angel at work; praying and leaving the
outcome to him.
94 Day 14 — PsaLMs 35-36


Pause for Thought
The idea of submissiveness — doing nothing, leaving it to God — is both the strength and
weakness of Psalm 37, because there is a time for ‘letting go and letting God’, and there is a
time for the intense and often costly activity of fighting back, and these can be confused to our
peril. For example, as young Christians we heard notable preachers teaching that sanctification was a matter of ‘letting go and letting God’, and we were grievously led astray, because
it’s not! The Bible urges us to resist even unto blood in striving against sin (Hebrews 12:4); it
describes our armour for the war, as we wrestle with ‘principalities’ and ‘powers’ (Ephesians
6:10-17, kjv). When it calls us to ‘present’ our ‘bodies’ (Romans 12:1—2, kyv) it does not
have in mind a future of dressing gown and slippers, but the arduous road of Christlike virtues
(Romans 12:4ff.) and the demanding task of putting on the Lord Jesus Christ (Romans
13:14). We have a race to run with demanding discipline (1 Corinthians 9:24—27); we are
in the tough trades of soldiers, athletes and farmers (2 Timothy 2:3-G). But there is also a
time for non-retaliation, for leaving it to God (Romans 12:19), for waiting silently for God,
holding our tongues and turning the other cheek (Lamentations 3:25-30; Matthew 5:39).
In such a time, says Psalm 37, our active response is to trust and delight in Yahweh (3-4),
to be still and wait (7), to live in the visible world of trial seeing clearly the invisible world
of divine sovereignty and justice (13, 18), to look to the end, secure in Yahweh's care, even
sharing in his laughter (verse 13; Psalm 2:4). Alongside Psalm 37, Isaiah 53: 79 and 1 Peter
2:20-25 make good reading: we are called to be like the Son of God in all things; he is our
inspiration and model as well as our Redeemer.
Day 15 — PSALM 37 99
Day 16 Read Psalms 38-39

Pause for Thought
It would have been helpful (Psalm 39:2) if David had felt able to tell us the sort of thing he
was fearful he might say in the presence of someone with no profession of faith. We can,
of course, try to guess. We have all heard Christians speak in such a carelessly confident
way about dying that their testimony sounded glib and brash, failing to take into account
the solemnity of death, or that in the majority of cases it comes as an unwelcome intruder
into a life we are loathe to leave. Again, have we not heard Christians speak of death — or
pray for someone seriously ill — as if death was the very worst thing that could possibly
happen (whereas the truth is that for a Christian, considered solely as an individual, setting
aside relationships and responsibilities, to die is the very best thing that can happen)! David
discovered that the ending of earthly life and the advent of death was, putting it mildly, a
hurdle to be faced, and a task to be prepared for. First, be careful what we say — and maybe
best say nothing. Dying without being afraid is one of the pearls of great price of being a
Christian, so be careful, in the words of Jesus, not to cast this pearl before swine. A calm and
unanxious demeanour could well speak louder than words. And, secondly, David certainly
does tell us how we can go about cultivating this — in the threefold directive implied in
39:7-8. As ever that great old song “Turn your eyes upon Jesus’ strikes the essential note — or
as David put it: ‘my hope is in you’. Are you in the prime of life? Are you in the later years
when death waits round the corner? Are you, by divine sovereign appointment, in a terminal
illness? Whatever: turn your eyes on Jesus and keep them fixed there. Beyond this, we must
take up Paul’s motto — to have a conscience void of offence towards God and man always
(Acts 24:16), for is that not what David is saying in Psalm 39:8? Yes, of course, all our sins
were anticipated at Calvary and covered there, but what was done once and for all on the
Cross becomes real all over again in our experience as we obey the divine command that all
men everywhere should repent (Acts 17:30). The third strand in a ‘good death’ is the repute
among others that we leave behind — a ‘savour of Christ among those who are being saved
and among those who are perishing’ (2 Cor. 2:15, Nrv).
104 Day 16 — PsaLms 38-39


Pause for Thought
Did David know, in Psalm 40:6-8, that he was writing of his greater son, yet to be born?
Or, being a prophet, did it ‘just happen’? Either way, as Hebrews 10:5-10 shows, David
was not only accurately forecasting the ‘mind’ of the Lord Jesus Christ as he approached
his death, but was, in fact, providing the key-stone of the arch of atonement teaching. The
principle of substitution — one standing in the place of another — was well established by
the time of Genesis 22:13. Abraham had said that ‘God will provide for himself the lamb’
(Genesis 22:8, Esv), and when his hand was stayed from sacrificing his son, and he saw ‘a
ram, caught in a thicket’, he knew what to do: the ram ‘instead of his son’ (22:13, Esv). In
this way, all through the period of the levitical sacrifices animals were a perfect expression
of substitution. Leviticus 16:21—22 both explains the ever-present ritual of the laying on of
the hand (Leviticus 1:4; 3:2; 4:4) — the appointment of a substitute — and also illustrates
how the substitute is thus constituted as a sin-bearer. This went on year after year, driving
home the fundamental truth that this is God’s way of dealing with his people’s sins. By his
will, it is possible that the sins of the guilty should pass to the account of the innocent, and
be dealt with, in subtitutionary fashion, by the death of the beast instead of the human, the
‘innocent’ instead of the guilty. By the time Isaiah wrote 52:13—53:12, his towering genius
was seeing things at a further stage. He found no fault with the principle of substitution, but
he saw that, ultimately, only a Person could substitute for persons. When we think about
it, the reason is obvious: we are sinners because our wills revolt against the will of God. But
an animal has no ‘will’ in the matter! Without knowledge or consent, it receives the task
of being the sinner’s substitute — which, in fact, leaves us without substitution at the very
heart of our sinfulness. Hence the importance of, ‘to do your good pleasure’ is my ‘delight’
(Psalm 40:7—8), and the huge significance of those words applied to Jesus: at last a sinless
Person accepts, consciously, voluntarily, the sins of those he came to save. The age-long
principle of substitution receives its perfect fulfilment.
110 Day 17 — PsaLMs 40-41


Pause for Thought
Nine times the question ‘why?’ rings out in Psalms 42-43. A good time, therefore, to remind
ourselves that question are not doubts. So often a person can be heard to say, ‘I have so many
doubts’ when, in fact, all they have is what we all have —‘so many questions’. And so it will be
till we get to heaven (where, very likely, we will be so caught up in glory that the answers will
no longer seem to matter). Look at the two halves of the refrain (42:5,11; 43:5): sure about
God (the second half), battered by circumstances (the first half). This is a perfect cameo of
life on earth. Don’t be afraid to raise questions, just make sure they are believing questions.
But sometimes our questions develop a life of their own and take over, and we find ourselves
‘downcast’. This too can happen to any of us, a common hazard arising because we are not
yet in glory. What then? A double remedy lies on the surface of today’s psalm. Neither of
its components may prove easy, but together they are effective. First look at the sequence of
42:5—6. Verse 5 surely implies that, with God as our hope, we have no need to be downcast;
then verse 6 chips in, “My soul is downcast.’ What a frank prayer; I know it’s foolish to be
down, but I am! This sort of openness with God runs through the psalm — what 42:8 calls ‘a
prayer to the transcendent God of my life’. Just as his love never falters, so his ear is always
open (8). Think of the middle hours of the night, when sleep flees and anxieties grow a
hundred times as big. What then? Have you tried, ‘in the night his song will be with me?
The remedial effect of one of the great hymns of yesterday or today. Then, secondly, there is
our mind. Romans 12:1—2 speaks of being transformed ‘by the renewing of your mind, Nrv’.
The mind is ‘renewed’ by feeding on new thoughts. If we are only being anxious about our
anxieties, worrying over our worries, stewing our problems, we are only nourishing the old
mind, the downcast spirit. No, says Psalm 42:4, 6, I will turn from old memories, ‘I keep
remembering you.’ The mind feeding itself on divine truth, dwelling on the promises of
God, recalling his endless mercies and unchanging love, turning its eyes upon Jesus — that
mind is walking the pathway of renewal.
114 Day 18 — PsaLMs 42-43


Pause for Thought
‘From palaces of ivory’ (8) ... ‘into the palace’ (15) sums up the ‘movement’ of Psalm 45,
does it not? But it was not from any earthly palace that the Messiah King emerged when he
came out to claim his bride. It was the perfume of heaven itself, of the Father’s house and
presence, that clung to him when he came to earth, but his mission was essentially the same:
that of our heavenly bridegroom seeking and saving his beloved to be his bride. Just think of
our privileges. The earthly bride of the earthly king was summoned to put the past behind
her (10) and to live only in and for the king’s devoted love (11). In the deepest, truest sense
we can forget ‘the things that are behind’ (Philippians 3:13, kjv), for they are all ‘under the
blood’, and what has been cleansed and forgiven on earth will not even be remembered in
heaven (compare Jeremiah 31:34). As Revelation 7:14 records, we stand before the throne
as those whose robes are both ‘washed’ and ‘made white’ — that is to say, not a single spot or
stain (however faint) remains. Pure white has replaced the scarlet of our sinfulness — and all
through the blood of Jesus, our Bridegroom-King. Secondly, the model for our subsequent
lives is that of a perfect honeymoon in perpetuity: ‘let the king desire your beauty ... bow
down to him’ (11). His attention is constantly focused on us — the Shepherd-Lamb (and who
could know what shepherding should be, better than a lamb?), ever attentive to our needs;
and, correspondingly, our longing for him — to ‘know him, and the power of his resurrection,
and the fellowship of his sufferings’ (Philippians 3:10, Kyv). Thirdly, we are robed for the
occasion (13-14; see Philippians 3:9; Romans 13:14) —
Clothed in His righteousness alone,
Faultless to stand before the throne!
Finally, our home is in the palace (14-15). Whether we think, with Philippians 3:20, of our
heavenly citizenship, or, with Revelation 7:15 (‘will spread his tent over them’) of living in
the divine tent-home, we are fully, totally, irrevocably, eternally ‘accepted in the Beloved’
(Ephesians 1:6, Kyv).
120 Day 19 — PsaLMs 44-45


Pause for Thought
Our three psalms cover in turn Christmas, Ascension and the Second Coming. In Psalm 46
our God is Immanuel, he who is ‘with us’ in all his deity of power as “Yahweh who is Hosts’,
who, in himself, is every power, resource and sufficiency; but he is with us, too, in all his
condescending tenderness, patience and care, for he is ‘the God of Jacob’, the patriarch who
is portrayed as the least worthy, the most crafty. Abraham likely towers above us in faith;
Isaac outshines us in patient, quiet godliness and continuance; Jacob, with all his frailties,
compromises, and shortcomings speaks to our condition: yes, this God, the God of Jacob, is
our God for ever, and ‘with us’ for ever. The Ascension proclaims that the work undertaken
has been accomplished; did you sing this as a child?
All his work is ended, joyfully we sing:
Jesus hath ascended: glory to our king!
So in Psalm 47:5 “God has gone up’ because what he ‘came down’ to do, he has done. Our
great High Priest has done what no previous priest could afford to do: he has ‘sat down’
because what he came down to do — ‘one sacrifice for sins for ever’ (Hebrews 10:12, xyv) — he
has done. In Psalm 46 we are at rest in his care; in Psalm 47 we are at rest on his finished work;
in Psalm 48 we are at rest in hope, for he will guide us to our dying day — yes, and beyond
that into eternal glory. To walk, in our mind’s eye, around our Zion-home, and view its
perfections, its towers and battlements intact, its palaces awaiting — it is a picture that runs
wider than itself, for this glorious, intact, perfect beauty is also the portion of each and every
redeemed sinner as we step through Zion's gates: we shall be like him for we shall see him as
he is (1 John. 3:2).
126 Day 20 — PsaLms 46-48


Pause for Thought
Only the New Testament brings the full revelation of the life to come; only Jesus can bring
‘life and immortality to light through the gospel’ (2 Timothy 1:10, xyv). Nevertheless the
Old Testament provided enough to be going on with! First, the Old Testament affirms that
the dead are alive. ‘Abraham’ it says, in a perfectly lovely expression, ‘was gathered to his
people’ (Genesis 25:8, kJv) — an expectation just as certain to delight the Christian heart.
Jacob knew that, in time, he would ‘go down to Sheol to my son’, speaking of the presumed
dead Joseph (Genesis 37:35, NRsv). David was sure, regarding his dead infant, ‘I shall go to
him’ (2 Samuel 12:23, xyv). Sheol, as such, was not a wholly attractive prospect, and how
could it be? Death broke up the body-soul unity that is human life. The body went to the
grave; the soul lived on (Ecclesiastes 12:7). Sheol was a sort of half-existence, so that Isaiah
can call its residents ‘the shadowy ones’ (14:9, rephaim, Nxjv ‘the dead’). The prospect of
Sheol was frightening for those who knew (or felt) themselves to be astray from Yahweh. We
saw this in Psalm 30, the dread of dying if God’s favour has been withdrawn (compare Psalm
6:5; etc.). But, in contrast, there is the bright expectation of life and light for those who
belong to him. The saying is true: “Death is not the extinguishing of the light, it is putting
out the lamp because dawn has come.’ To those right with God, death brings a reversal of
the inequalities of our present life (Psalm 49:14b); it leads to a blessed ‘taking’, undefined in
Psalm 49:15 (Nxyv ‘receive’), but which Psalm 73:24 says leads to ‘glory’. The night is over
(compare Romans 13:12); morning has come (Psalm 49:14). Shadows have passed away,
death is ‘swallowed up’, let the feasting begin (Isaiah 25:6—10a)!
Day 21 — PsaLms 49-50 h3)5)
Day 22, Read Psalms 51-52

134 Day 22 — PsaLMs 51-52


Pause for Thought
There can hardly be a psalm in the whole collection that speaks so plainly to the world of
the twenty-first century as Psalm 52. We don't have to name names or specify localities or
identify causes to remind ourselves that the spirit of Doeg the Edomite lives on. There are
those everywhere all too ready to forward their interests, as he did, at the point of a sword.
It is the world we live in: a world in which some advance by force of arms, and the rest seek
security behind force of arms. Doeg on a universal scale! So what does Psalm 52 reply? First,
that the power of committed, unchanging divine love is the sufficient alternative to the “big
fellow and his arrogant tongue (1). David was in the thick of a life-threatening situation,
with Saul’s death squads as ruthlessly after him as ever Doeg was after the priests. He (almost
blandly) looks danger in the eye, and replies that God’s steadfast love remains every day.
Secondly, it invites us to keep in mind the great settlement that is on its way, the final
showdown, the total overthrow of the Doeg-spirit and its practitioners (verse 5 — the heart of
Psalm 52). Do remind yourself of the heaping up of verbs of destruction — four altogether!
The terminator truly terminated! So we are allowed to appraise every threat: it won't last; its
end may be soon; it may continue longer than we would wish; but the end is written. Thirdly,
the way forward is the way of faith. Psalm 52 deals with contrasts — the bracketing contrast
between evil self-confidence (1) and the good name (9) — there’s something worth pondering!
But look also at the contrast between the two trees — one uprooted (5), the other flourishing
(8). And then there is the contrast between trusting one’s own resources (7), and trusting in
steadfast love (8) — a trust sustained by delightful fellowship (9c) and restfully, confidently
awaiting the fulfillment of all the ‘good name’ pledges (9d).
140 Day 22 — PsatMs 51-52


Pause for Thought
Regularity, setting specific times apart for prayer — and keeping to them in a disciplined way —
is something the Bible encourages. We all find the story of Daniel’s practice in prayer moving
to read (Daniel 6:10). How, in spite of the king’s foolish, self-glorifying edict, he went to his
upper room, with its windows towards Jerusalem, and knelt down three times a day. We sense
not only the old man’s yearning heart for the city of God, but his confidence in prayer and
his commitment. I wonder if Daniel had caught the vision of the threefold discipline from
Psalm 55:17, ‘evening and morning and noonday’? How to end one day and begin another;
how to stop in the middle of a busy life and turn to God. Isaiah made a forecast that the
Servant of the Lorp — the Lord Jesus — would practice the discipline of what we used to call
‘the morning watch’ (see Isaiah 50:4), and Mark 1:35 records an occasion when he did just
that. In Acts 3:1 we find Peter and John keeping the statutory hour of prayer, the ninth hour,
and the devout Cornelius testifies to the same prayer discipline (Acts 10:30). Should we be
‘evening, morning and noon’ people? The answer is “Why not?’ Two truths are important
before we make excuses about the busyness of life today. First, prayer is a simple thing, not
necessarily prolonged (Matthew 6:7-8), and secondly, none of the passages we have referred
to says anything about the time when we pray or for what length of time. As soon as we think
of starting the day with God, our minds begin thinking about four or five a.m. or some other
unearthly hour — because we read somewhere that some great prayer-warrior was always up
and about by then! ‘Setting aside time’ means just that — doing what is possible for us within
our God-given day and our God-given abilities. Time to read a verse of the Bible; time to call
upon God. And here’s a final thought: Psalm 55 begins with prayer (1) and ends with trust
(23). If we say we are those who trust, those who are saved by faith, then a primary way this
shows itself is to balance life's demands with life’s prayers.
Day 23 — PsALMs 53-55 147
Day 24 Read Psalms 56-58

Pause for Thought
What a challenge Psalm 58 is to our feebleness in prayer, our lack of rigour and our limited
awareness of the scope and power of ‘praying about it’! The situation the psalm envisages
is one familiar enough to us: Unrighteous rulers; rulers that look on in silence when
unrighteousness is being perpetrated. Even looking no further than verse 1 we could write a
book about planet earth in the twenty-first century! In the face of wicked powers and crafty
powers, how often we contemplate those earthly rulers whom we are well aware know better,
and we shake our heads sadly and say, ‘But they don’t know what to do?’ Then we look into
ourselves and admit, ‘Neither do we.’ Psalm 58 would confront our defeatism with its straight
questions, ‘Don’t you? Have you thought of praying about it?’ David does not tell us whom
he had in mind — the Bible often leaves gaps like that, so that we can fill them in with our
own problems — but he knew what to do: Take it to the Lorn! In the psalm, verses 1—5 raise
problems: unrighteous rule (1-2), and the problem of original sin infecting wicked rulers
(3—5 — whatever can alter that!). After verse 6, the unrighteous ones are leaking away, melting
away, their weapons falling to the ground uselessly, gone before you can say Jack Robinson!
The living, raging God has acted — because his people asked him to do so (6). Mind you,
the prayer made in verse 6 is vivid, practical, resolute, realistic: Dare we pray like that? We
admit it: when we pray on a world-scale we like to concentrate our thought on the more
bland request that suffering be relieved, the hungry fed, persecuted Christians be delivered,
prisoners released. But, to say the least, there are situations when these desireable ends can
only be realistically met if unjust governments (and their representatives) are overthrown,
cast down and deprived of their power to injure. Is it time we too began to pray about teeth
being broken and fangs drawn?
154 Day 24 — PsaLms 56-58


Pause for Thought
Psalms 59 and 60 make an interesting pair. Like the rest of the psalter of which they are part
they are psalms of ‘taking it to the Lorn’. Isn’t that, indeed, one of the main lessons of the
Psalms — that there is nothing we cannot pray about, and no situation in which the Lorn will
fail to hear and answer prayer? In Psalm 59 David is in trouble through no fault of his own
(3-4), and, as we read the parallel passages in 1 Samuel, we find that this is indeed the case
He had even been an exemplary servant to Saul; he had ministered to the nervously unstable
king, and fought his battles; he was truly free of blame. He did, of course, choose to become
a fugitive, and that may not have been a right decision, but we must assume David felt
there was no other course open to him. At any rate, as far as the problem the psalm faces is
concerned — human, savage, enmity — he was blameless, and in dire straits! On the contrary,
David’s trouble in Psalm 60 is entirely of his own making. I am afraid that we have to say
becoming king rather went to his head. How else are we to explain the fact that, in relation
to Saul, David was totally content to do nothing but wait for God to keep his promise of
the kingdom — and he did so even against the most persuasive advice (1 Samuel 24:4~7;
26:7-11). But when he became king he at once started military operations against the sad
‘rump’ of Saul’s kingdom (2 Samuel 2:3; 3:6). What happened to the policy of waiting for
God to keep his promises? And then there was this imperialistic nonsense of marching north
to wage war gratuitously against Hadadezer — just because he was vulnerable and a land-grab
was possible! What has become of the David of ‘waiting faith’? Even the golden king could
be a silly billy! But ... but ... but (and this is the wonderful thing), whether we are wholly
innocent, or whether we are seriously and very much at fault, the way of prayer is still open
—and effective!
160 Day 25 — PsaLms 59—6o


Pause for Thought
A sleepless night is just as much a gift of God as is a night’s sound sleep! Not that we usually
look on it that way — but David did! Those ‘watches of the night’, so often occasions of
restlessness, always time when the day’s ‘mole hills’ become mountains of anxiety, he turned
into opportunities to ‘muse’ about God (Psalm 63:6), and to come, not to a fresh place of
worry, but to a fresh place of joy and all-round assurance (63:7—11). Silence — even before
God — is not necessarily helpful. It depends what we are doing with it, where our minds
are. Left to themselves they flit hither and yon, and add to our restlessness. But learn from
David. He lets us into his five leading thoughts: ‘my salvation (Psalm 62:1), the rock, topsecurity (62:2), hope (62:5), and refuge (62:7). From Psalm 63:7 we can add ‘such a help’
and the ‘shadow of your wings’. There’s a fruitful galaxy of thoughts for you. ‘Salvation’
leads our thoughts into the past, to the Cross where Jesus died, the wonderful ‘one sacrifice
for sins for ever’ (Hebrews 10:12, Kyv), the eternal security that is our ‘hope’. In earthly
terms, hope is certainty of time, uncertainty of event (‘I hope it will be fine tomorrow);
in the Bible ‘hope’ is uncertainty of time, certainty of event (We shall be with him “...
see him as he is, 1 John 3:2.). The ‘rock’ (which David mentions three times in Psalm 63)
pictures permanence, stability — and the ‘smitten rock’, life-giving, of Exodus 17. It is also
the ‘rock that is higher’ (Psalm 61:2), the perch for our ‘top-security’. Loveliest of all, in our
tinyness and insignificance, try being a day old chick and run to the sheltering wings (Psalms
61:4; 63:7). We are ‘transformed by the renewing of [our] minds’ (Romans 12:2). Minds are
‘renewed’ by fixing themselves on new topics (Colossians 3:1—2).
166 Day 26 — PsaLms 61-63


Pause for Thought
Even though the Bible opens with God the Creator, by the end it would, I think, like Psalm 65, only approach creation through redemption. The hymn is right when it says,
Heaven above is softer blue,
Earth around is sweeter green;
Something lives in every hue,
Christless eyes have never seen ...
This is true. The river estuary we once overlooked was filled with fresh beauty by the realization
that (whatever about the ice-age and water erosion and all that) this lovely watered valley was
scooped out by our Saviour-Creator’s hand for our enjoyment. That is why it is so beautiful,
and that is its heart of beauty. The world is his world, and as Psalm 65, part 2, reminds us,
all its mighty ‘forces’ are his forces, there only to do his bidding, at his command, subject
to his control. The God of salvation is the God who makes it safe for us to live in a world
of potentially destructive forces and people. Everything is beautiful in his time. But was
Psalm 65 intended for singing at Harvest Thanksgivings? The last five verses would suggest
so, and they provide another deep lesson about the world around. Why does grain grow?
What makes the soil fertile? Why are there flocks and herds to ‘clothe’ pasturelands? Nothing
happens without our Creator-Saviour-Sovereign God. There is no life apart from his life. The
farmer or gardener plants but he does not ‘co-operate’ with God. No, he obeys the rules and
principles discovered or revealed (Isaiah 28:23—29) in creation, and unobtrusively taught by
the Creator. Fertilizers have no power of life unless he makes them fertilize; potatoes have
no power of growth unless he makes them grow. He is the Lorp and giver of life, who, in
the same mercy that prompted the work of salvation, and with the same power that controls
creation and history, ‘crowns the year with his goodness’.
Day 27 — Psaims 64-65 
174 Day 28 — PsaLMs 66-67


Pause for Thought
Two convictions unite today’s psalms. First, that there is only one way of salvation for the
whole world. Look no further than Psalm 66:3, 5—G. ‘All the earth’ is invited to consider
Yahweh's awesome works, but these works are none other than the Exodus-redemption, and
the crossing of the Red Sea; the Passover Lamb, and the consummation of that victory by the
final rout of Egypt in the sea; the Cross of Jesus and his resurrection. Secondly, confidence
that the world will yet come to know this salvation; that ‘all peoples’ will yet give Yahweh
praise and worldwide reverence (Psalm 67:2, 7). It is good to be reminded of these (biblically)
commonplace truths, not least at times when the forces against the gospel of Christ seem to be
on the increase. So far so good, but this is all ‘vision’. What about a ‘policy’, that is, a practical
programme for making the vision happen? For this we need to take the psalms in reverse
order. The teaching of Psalm 67 is that God blesses us so that the world may come to know
his salvation 67:2). It is, of course, true that he blesses us for our own enrichment, because
he loves us, and delights to share himself with us. But there is another side to ‘blessing’: it
comes to us for the sake of somebody else. “Blessing” puts us under responsibility — whether it
is that we so respond to God’s blessing that others see the difference in our lives, or that there
is someone waiting to be told of this generous God. Whatever. Blessing is granted in order
that the world may know his salvation. When it comes to the spoken word, Psalm 66 is very
direct: ‘I will recount ... what he has done for my soul’ (66:16). It is not a matter of having
all the answers (John 9:25), or of total Bible knowledge, or of theological expertise; it is a
matter of ‘May I tell you how it has been for me.’ In a word: a closer walk with God whereby
we come under his blessing, and have an up-to-date testimony to his grace.
176 Day 28 — PsaLMs 66-67


Pause for Thought
‘Aslan is a lion’, said Mr. Beaver, ‘the Lion, the great Lion.’ ... “Then he isn’t safe?’ said
Lucy. ‘Safe?’ said Mr Beaver ... “Course he isn’t safe! But he’s good. He’s the King.’ And the
Chronicles of Narnia got it exactly right: ‘not safe but good.’ It’s straight out of Psalm 68.
Here is a psalm for the threatening day when Jesus’ enemies seem to be on top, their power
let loose, their arguments unanswerable. But not so! The wicked will perish (20), kings will
flee (12), heads will be wounded (21), and lives forfeited (23). It’s as sure as the truth that
the Rider in the skies (33) is also the Rider on earth (4). Meantime, the same Sovereign One
is the defender of the defenceless (3), the deliverer of captives (6), the provider for the poor
(10), our daily beneficiary and Saviour (19), and he holds ‘the keys of death and of Hades’
(verse 20; Revelation 1:18). We may be as insignificant as Benjamin (27) but we too have
our place in the victory march, and it is our God who has ascended on high and has captured
captives (18). The victory has already been won, the King is already on his throne, and — look
around you — from all the earth people are every day making their way to pay homage-gifts
to the King of kings and Lord of lords. At first sight Psalm 68 seems a curious collection of
bits and pieces, but, as we have seen, it is not so, but an ordered representation of a victory
parade. The enemy has been overwhelmed and his armies scattered; the throne has been won.
No psalm can give us a sharper or more helpful, reassuring perspective from which to view
the world we live in, or a more perfect vantage point from which to secure and maintain a
balanced perspective for our demanding days.
Day 29 — PsaLm 68 

184 Day 30 — PsaLm 69


Pause for Thought
“What would Jesus do?’ is a good question to ask — and it often yields worthwhile answers
both in general and in particular for our conduct. When we read Psalm 69 the question has
to be different: “What would Jesus say?’ Can we hear verses 22-28 on his lips? First go off, we
say, ‘No ... certainly not!’ Jesus would have said, ‘Father, forgive them, for they do not know
what they are doing’ (Luke 23:34, nrsv), and that has a sound of rightness about it, for as
a general principle he instructed us to love our enemies and do good to those that hate us
(Matthew 5:44). But it doesn’t do to rush to a decision. Jesus is the bridegroom who shuts the
door so that his welcomed guests are secure in his presence; but the same shut door excludes
those who are dismissed as not known (Matthew 25:10-11). He sees worldwide guests at
his heavenly banquet, but others cast into outer darkness (Matthew 8:11—12). As the Son
of Man all judgment has been committed to him by the Father (John 5:26-27), and those
bearing the mark of the beast will be ‘tormented ... in the presence of the Lamb’ (Revelation
14:9—-10, nrsv). In his judicial capacity our Lord Jesus is the executor of the holy will of God
and the enforcer of his word — and Deuteronomy 19:19 teaches that the false accuser must
receive what he planned unjustly to inflict. David could only pray for divine action; Jesus in
judgment would take David’s prayers and turn them into pronouncements of condemnation,
merited sentences to be carried out. We need to read these verses with serious self-awareness,
and very solemnized minds and hearts. Our only escape from the Son of Man, our Judge, is
to flee to the Son of Man our Saviour. He who said, ‘Depart from me, you cursed’ also said,
‘Come, you who are blessed of my Father’ (Matthew 25:34, 41, Esv). The awesome ‘throne
of his glory (Matthew 25:31, NxJv) is also the throne of grace (Hebrews 4:16).
Day 30 — PsaLm 69 

190 Day 31 — PsaLMs 70-71


Pause for Thought
How far back in your life can you trace the hand of God? If you have never done this, I
venture to think you will be surprised! In my earliest infancy I was left for a weekend with my
maternal grandmother — and the weekend stretched out for my first seven years! The direct
result of this is that I cannot remember a time when I did not love the Bible as the Word of
God. Was this not the hand of God? I could tell you of more ‘coincidences’ (as they are called),
and ‘accidents’ (as they seem), and the right person being in the right place at the right time
— but I have no doubt your ‘story’ is similar. Consciously or unconscious to us, Yahweh has
been our support since birth (Psalm 71:6); it was he who caused us to be born at the time and
place of his choice. Not accident but design, not coincidence but plan, not chance but divine
direction — that is the story of every believer, the secret history of every conversion. It is the
direct implication of the wondrous title of ‘Sovereign One’ (verses 5, 16), a God who truly is
God, who holds in his hand not only the broad sweep of world history, but the tiniest details
of personal stories; a God whom no circumstance or adversary — or collection of adversaries —
can defeat; present in every place, master of every situation, deciding and controlling at every
time. And so it will continue to be as long as earthly life shall last.
E’en down to old age, all my people shall prove
My sovereign, eternal, unchangeable love;
And then, when grey hairs shall their temples adorn,
Like lambs they still shall still in my bosom be borne.
See Isaiah 46:3-4. Our old age is as much his loving concern as our youth and prime
(Psalm 71:9, 18).
194 Day 31 — PsaLms 70-71


Pause for Thought
Here is an attempt to summarise the portrait of the messianic king in the Psalms. If you have
time to look up the references, all the better; if not, just gather an impression of a king larger
than life, awaiting fulfillment in Jesus. Against world opposition (Psalm 2:1—3; 110:1) he is
victorious (45:3—5; 89:22ff.); through the Lorp (18:46) he establishes world rule (2:8—12;
45:17; 72:8—-11; 89:25), based on Zion (2:6), marked by moral integrity (45:4, 6; 72:2-4, 7).
His rule is everlasting (21:4; 72:5), prosperous (72:7, 16), loyal to the Lorn (72:18-19), preeminent in dignity (45:2—7), friend of the poor and enemy of the oppressor (72:2, 4, 12-14).
The righteous flourish (72:7). He is remembered for ever (45:17): his name is everlasting
(72:17); he is the object of unending thanks (72:15) and everlasting blessing (45:2). He
is heir to David’s covenant (89:28-37; 132:11) and Melchizedek’s priesthood (110:4). He
belongs to the Lorp (89:18) and is devoted to him (21:7; 63:1—-8, 11). He is his son (2:7),
seated at his right hand (110:1), and is himself God (45:6). Much of this portrait stems from
Nathan’s ministry in 2 Samuel 7, but the steps by which incipient monarchical hopes became
the expectation of a perfect, righteous, human, divine, everlasting and universal king cannot
be traced. It is still urged that it was the collapse of monarchy at the time of the Babylonian
exile that prompted the development of hope of the royal Messiah. This, of course, requires
arbitrary re-dating, in contradiction of the clear evidence of the Old Testament. But, in fact,
if it is at all true that the seed bed of hope is failure, we do not need to look beyond David
himself to find enough failure to give rise to hope that something better lies ahead.
Day 32 — PsaLm 72 


Pause for Thought
Psalm 73 contains one of the most rhapsodic and uplifting passages in the whole Psalter, and,
indeed, there is hardly need for anything beyond letting their rhythms and sentiments sink
into our souls. But, hoping to help and not hinder this process, look at some of the detail of
these verses. They are the heart of the message of the psalms. Asaph is weighing things in the
balance: what can he reckon in his favour as compared with the ‘wellbeing’ of the ungodly
which so troubled him. There are, indeed, things which we find in our heavenly “balance
sheet’ — and which we should constantly prize. First and foremost is peace with God (23a),
that we are constantly accepted, welcomed, retained in his presence. ‘Peace with God’, the
firstfruits of Calvary (John 20:19), our unchangeable inheritance in Jesus —
I know that while in heaven he stands,
No tongue can bid me thence depart.
Then there is security in his keeping — he who has gripped us by our hands (23b). Recall
Matthew 14:31 and John 10:28—29. Thirdly, there is the problem of ‘the future all unknown’.
To us who cannot foresee what the end of this morning will bring, there is the comfort that
everything that happens does so in conformity to and by direction of his ‘counsel’ (24a).
What is impenetrable to us (the future) is an already drawn map lying before him (Ephesians
1:3-4; 2:10; Philippians 1:29-30). We can never over-exalt the sovereignty of God: he is
truly God — the God in charge. And we need to remind ourselves that this is even especially
so when things turn out either other than we expect or would wish. He is always on our side;
always implementing his ‘counsel’. All this is a store of pure gold entered in our account;
yet the finest gold is yet to come. There is that which even the life-assurance man dare not
mention by name when he delicately suggests ‘if anything should happen’. But the Bible has
no such hesitations. It knows all about ‘afterwards’, the future; it calls it the ‘glory’ (24b). Our
gracious God is not only for earth; he is our guarantee of heaven (25-26).
204 Day 33 — PsaLm 73


Pause for Thought
How well Psalms 74 and 75 belong together! In principle Psalm 75 tackles the same situation
as 74, but from a different perspective. In Psalm 74 the people are still in the soup, a situation
of dreadful calamity and destruction is still unresolved, whereas Psalm 75 looks back on some
wonderful work of God which has solved the problem. But within this altered perspective,
the message is the same — and it is a message of immense importance for us who live in the
same hazardous world as the psalms. At the heart of each psalm (74:12-17; 75:5-7) lies a
‘credal’ statement: in 74, affirmed by the writer, Asaph; in 75, spoken by God himself about
himself. What is this telling us? we should ask. Not, in the first instance, what is its content,
but why are we faced, twice over, with the unheralded introduction of truth about God into
a situation of trouble? And the answer is plain, is it not? That at the centre of our trouble,
danger, loss, sorrow — when hostile forces are on top, rampant, triumphalist — our course is
to remind ourselves what we believe about our God. We are to tell ourselves not how horrible
life is, how unfairly I have been treated, how insupportable my sorrow is, but how kingly,
saving, powerful (74:12—14); how provident (74:15); how totally in charge (74:16-17) God
is; how fully in command of history (75:2); how secure is his world (75:3); how subservient
to him are earth’s arrogant powers (75:4—5). These are the bread and butter truths of the
scriptural revelation of God. They speak of a God in charge, a God who makes all the
decisions, a God fully and truly God — a God worth trusting. When, in the light of these
basic truths, we ‘turn our eyes on Jesus’, the ‘things of earth’ do ‘grow strangely dim’ — that
is to say, they take on their proper size and proportions ‘in the light of his glory and grace’.
210 Day 34 — PsaLms 74-75


Pause for Thought
If the Psalms tell us — directly or by implication — that there is a time to stop praying, we need
to sit up and take notice! The overall theme of the collection surely is ‘take it to the Lorp
in prayer. Nothing else so adequately summarizes what the Psalms are all about. But, says
Psalm 77, ‘I tried it and it didn’t work’. Here is a psalmist in deep trouble; he drives himself to
prayer, past the point of exhaustion, and gets no relief. His soul still refuses to be comforted.
But eventually — and surely by wonderfully tender divine grace — the solution dawns on his
poor battered consciousness: ‘the years of the right hand of the Most High’ (77:10). Now, the
point is this: the solution to every problem is the way of simple faith. It may not prove to be
a simple thing to place faith, and to hold on to the way of faith, but faith itself is essentially
simple — childlike trust. It was in this way that the eternal problem of getting right with God
was solved, was it not — simple faith in Jesus? If the greatest problem yielded to faith, how
much more lesser problems, however testing? It is the way to greet each new day, to face every
new problem, rise to every new challenge — ‘Father, I trust you!’ But — and how important
this is — faith must rest on a sure foundation. Faith is not a leap in the dark; it is a leap from
light into light. Faith is conviction leading to action on the basis of evidence — and the only
sufficient evidence is what God has done, objectively, historically. That’s why the psalm stops
so abruptly. It does not draw a conclusion but demonstrates a solution: the mind stored with,
assured of, resting on the great facts of God’s salvation is a mind at rest.
Day 35 — PsaLms 76-77 

216 Day 36 — PsaLm 78


Pause for Thought
The ‘open question’ and the ‘not-open question’. In Psalm 78 Asaph offered an answer to the
riddle of history: what is its fundamental principle and explanation? Why are things as they
are, and what next? In the event he indicated a double answer, depending en which point of
view we take: looking at history with a human eye or looking at it as God sees it. God’s point
of view can be summed up in one word: perseverance. He never gives up. At Passover (verses
12, 43) he put his hand to the plough of our redemption and he refused to turn back. There
is a rhythm to history: when redemption is followed by disobedience, this incurs wrath, but
wrath does not have the last word. Our misery (even when it is caused by his righteous anger)
brings misery in heaven (Judges 2:18b), and compassion prompts mercy. But recall that the
second sequence of the same four elements was deliberately linked with the first sequence
(40). In other words, the sequence of the four was an ongoing rhythm: it is how things are.
For our comfort and reassurance, then, we may take it for granted: God never gives up.
He has determined on our salvation with eternal security and he will see to it, amid all the
fluctuations and riddles of daily experience. He is the ‘faithful God’ of 1 Corinthians 1:7—9.
We await the revelation of our Lord Jesus Christ and he will confirm us to the end so that we
are blameless in that day. Yes, we can take comfort, but we must not lapse into complacency,
for, as Asaph saw history from the human viewpoint, the key factors were a sharply focused
mind and a keenly retentive memory as the prerequisites to an obedient life. It is there right
at the start of our long psalm (9-11): they did not keep his covenant, they forgot his works
and thus they refused to walk in his law — and thereby hung the whole tale of their woe.
Day 36 — Psaim 78 

Pause for Thought
Together Psalms 79 and 80 paint a picture of the whole people of God — Israel to the north,
Psalm 80, Judah to the south, Psalm 79, in deep trouble. Each section crying out ‘How long?’
(79:5; 80:4) in their protracted trials. Behind the psalms we can see and feel the trauma and
agonizing loss when first Samaria and then Jerusalem fall to the enemy. But they are also
complementary in another way. Psalm 79 emphasises that Yahweh’s people, under, the rod of
his wrath, are still his people. In the first two verses the possessive your comes four times: no
matter what, it is still ‘your inheritance’, ‘your temple’, ‘your servants’, and, most wonderful
of all, ‘your beloved’. And at the end of the psalm (79:13), ‘your people’, ‘the sheep of your
pasture’. The matching truth in Psalm 80 is that even when our sins alienate him Yahweh
does not change: he is still (80:1) ‘tthe Shepherd’, still the Sovereign enthroned over the
Mercy Seat (Exodus 25:17—22). In a word, our status has not changed, nor has his saving
mercy. Press the complementary theme further: in Psalm 79 we learn that we can plead our
miseries before him (8, 11). He is still just as he was in Exodus 3:7, feeling our sorrows, and
in Judges 2:18, moved to pity and action by our groaning. Psalm 80 matches this by pointing
to Yahweh: he is ‘Hosts’ (4, 7, 14, 19). Whatever we may at any time need, it is there in the
plenitude of the divine nature and powers. And he always has his ‘secret weapon’ — the Man
at his right hand (80:17) by whom we can be restored and renewed.
And He is at the Father's side,
The Man of love, the Crucified.
Day 37 — PsaLms 79-80
Day 38 Read Psalms 81-83


 Day 38 — Psalms 81-83


Pause for Thought
According to today’s psalms there are three distinct things that threaten personal, social and
national stability. Psalm 83 calls attention to international unrest, threatening Israel’s life and
continuance. Psalm 82 swings the spotlight internally: the insidious threat of the corruption
of a sound legal system, the skewing of due process of law to make it serve some in individual
or powerful ‘interest’ and, in particular, the failure of the ‘system’ to protect the vulnerable
and serve the needs of those in want. The notable sense of solemnity in Psalm 82 and the
seriousness of the application of historical lessons drawn in Psalm 83 call on us to bring a like
sense of urgency to the obviously parallel situations in which we find ourselves today — and
to learn the psalmist’s lesson of how to respond to these circumstances: namely the exercise of
assured prayer (82:8; 83:13-18). The answer does not lie in militarism or alliances; it will not
be found in politics or legislation; only God can deal with it, and prayer should be our first,
last and on-going remedy. The spotlight points in yet a different direction again in Psalm
81. By his work of redemption (81:6—7) the Lorn established dominion over his redeemed
(Romans14:9), and his authoritative command to them (do you recall?) was ‘hear ... hear
... hear ... hear!’ The greatest threat to the redeemed is if they fail to listen to the Word of
God, and their primary obligation to their Redeemer-God is to hear his holy Word. In their
early, wilderness days they had the patriarchal traditions and the living voice of Moses; in
our case we have the completed Bible. Amos charged the nations (1:3—2:3) with sins against
humanity, against the voice of conscience; but when it came to Judah the cardinal sin was
failure to hear the law of the Lorp (Amos 2:4).
A carefully balanced statement of restoration: verse 1, the need to be dealt with, restoration;
verse 2, its direct cause dealt with, iniquity and sin; verse 3, the ultimate problem solved,
divine anger.
Day 38 — Psatms 81-83 209
Day 39 Read Psalms 84-86

236 Day 39 — PsatMs 84-86


Pause for Thought
There is a golden thread running through today’s three psalms: the thread of ‘glory’. In the
wonderful Psalm 84 it is the glory that lies ahead at the end of pilgrimage (84:11); in Psalm
85 it is glory dwelling in the land (85:9) when Yahweh steps on to the scene (13); in Psalm
86 it is the glory of his name, now (86:12) and to come (9). When we arrive in the courts
of the Lorp (Psalm 84), all will be glory — glory such as is now unimaginable. As soon as we
see the face of Jesus we shall know as never before how much we are loved, how fully we have
been forgiven, how great and endless is our security in his presence. It is, says Psalm 84:11,
the glory of grace and the glory of good. And in that delightful psalm, though glory awaits
the end of the road, yet the sense conveyed throughout is that every step of our pilgrim path
is touched with his glory — the safety that we find at Calvary (84:3), the sustenance that
comes when the pilgrim road is tough (6). Secondly, the glory we desire to see publicly in
our land is the glory of Yahweh's personal presence, which comes in response to our prayers
for restoration and new life, through his undying love (86:4—7). When we are what we ought
to be, he will come and dwell among us in manifest glory. Fundamentally, however, this too
is Calvary-based (85:10), where every divine attribute and requirement was satisfied, and a
kiss of love resounded through the divine heart. So we come to Psalm 86 and the glory due
to his name. The ultimate glory (86:9) is largely his business (Philippians 2:9-11), but ‘T
will glorify’ (86:12) places the responsibility firmly on me — and you. It is a by-product of
learning his truth (86:1 1a), walking in his way (11b), single-mindedly reverencing his name
(11c), and all in response to his undying love and salvation (13).
242 Day 39 — Psatms 84-86


Pause for Thought
The Bible never hides its head in the sand when it comes to life’s troubles! And like all the
rest, Psalm 88 is written for our learning. Here is trouble without explanation: lasting as far
back as the eye can see; seemingly stretching ahead without relief; and likely to be overtaken,
still unsolved, by death. Should such an experience be ours, how is it to be faced? Start where
the psalm starts: by affirming what is known about our God — that he, and only he — is the
‘God of my salvation’, or, as we could translate it, ‘My saving God’, a God whose very nature
it is to save his dear ones. This is the purpose of a creed — scaffolding to hold us upright when
the storm comes. When everything in us cries out to moan about our lot, cry out rather that
he is Father, Son and Holy Spirit, he is
... the love that drew salvation’s plan!
... the grace that brought it down to man!
— the God of all grace. Then, like this lovely psalmist, don’t hesitate to see your trials as
coming from the hand of God. Don't bother your head with problems arising, or thought to
arise, from seeing things this way. This is the truth of the matter: if we are in the soup it is he
who has decided what sort of soup it is, and at what temperature, and how long, and why!
He is God. Jesus has assured us that we cannot be plucked out of his and the Father’s hand
(John 10:28-29). Where were we when the trouble came? Why, where we always are — in his
hand! Did the trial ‘get in’ because he let go of us? Certainly not; the trial only means that
he grips us more tightly! And thirdly, give yourself constantly to urgent prayer (1, 9, 13). To
abandon prayer is to embrace atheism. Prayer does change things — and its transformative
work is ever and also in the person who is praying. “Who walks in darkness and has no light,
let him trust in the name of the Lorn, and lean upon his God’ (Isaiah 50:10).
248 Day 40 — PsatMs 87-88


Pause for Thought
Have you a recipe for the day when everything falls apart? In a time like ours when so many
voices are preaching a spurious ‘prosperity gospel’ it is so essential to remind ourselves how
much of the Bible we must consign to the rubbish heap if they are true! Anything that speaks
of warfare or the conflict of being a Christian, of striving unto blood in our fight against sin,
anything about ‘thorns in the flesh’ — anything like Psalm 89. But there it stands, right at the
heart of God’s inspired Word! There are days when everything falls apart — and the Lord Jesus
himself warned that ‘in the world you will have tribulation (John 16:33, Esv, Nxyv). Being a
Christian can be like being a woman in labour (John 16:20-22). So the question presses on
us: Have we a recipe? Yes, if we let Psalm 89 be our teacher. The recipe is to sing and to pray
— where the psalm begins (1-2) and ends (46-51). What we need are not songs of ‘feeling’
(though how good some of them can be!) but songs of affirmation, the great hymns which
declare fundamental truth about God. That’s what Ethan the Ezrahite sang — God in creation
(5) and redemption (10), God in his messianic purposes, (18). Newton's masterpiece — ‘How
sweet the name of Jesus sounds’ — has emotion enough and truth enough to last us all our
days, and light and life for the direst darkness. Then there is praying. In our songs we affirm
how true God’s truth is; in our prayers we bring our bewilderment into his presence, and
believingly ask him to hasten his promises (46-51). We know from scripture that what seems
like delay is full of mercy (2 Peter 3:1—9); we also know that he never fails to hear our prayer,
and to run to our help. He knows our weakness and remembers that we are but dust (Psalm
103:14). Our prayers may not prompt the Second Coming before a noon deadline, but they
will bring the Lord Jesus into our lives, needs and circumstances.
Day 41 — PsaLm 89 

Pause for Thought
“Taking up residence’ is the thought that runs through these three psalms. In 90:1, Moses,
who has been a resident alien for forty years in Midian, links himself with Israel which has
seen four hundred immigrant years in Egypt. He notes that nevertheless they have had a
permanent address, a dwelling place in generation after generation, the covering of the Most
High (91:1). Psalm 92:13 is careful to remind us that this is all of grace: we are Yahweh's
transplants. Our residency is by his will and deed: as Colossians 1:13 puts it in kingdom
terms, he ‘rescued us from the power of the darkness, and moved our house into the kingdom
of the son of his love’; or James 1:18, in family terms, ‘Having made up his mind to do so,
he gave us birth by the word of truth (compare 1 Peter 1:23). This is something that is all of
God (Ephesians 1:4; 2:8-9) — from the thought to the deed to the regenerating word. It is
where we are; the fundamental, unchangeable truth about us in Christ. But there is another
aspect to all this which we can call ‘claiming our residence’. Paul put it this way. When he
had reminded Timothy that the last days would include ‘menacing times’ (2 Timothy 3:1),
seductive people (3:6), and increasing wickedness (3:13), he gave this directive (3:14), “but
as for you, abide in the things you have learned.’ You have a permanent address; make sure
you are living there. Make sure you can always be found ‘care of’ The Word of God. How
did our psalms make this point? On the one hand Yahweh is our dwelling place; on the other,
I keep ‘Saying about Yahweh: “My refuge and my stronghold, my God, in whom I ever
trust” (91:2) ... ‘you, Yahweh are my refuge’ (91:9). The dwelling place is mine, by divine
appointment; let it also be mine by constant choice, deliberate personal reminder, personal
affirmation of what is the ‘real truth’ about me. I live with the Holy One (90:7), so let me be
holy; I live with the unfailingly loving God (92:2), so let me set my love on him (91:14). This
is a great part of what the New Testament words ‘in Christ’ mean.
Day 42 — PsaLMs 90-92 

264 Day 43 — PsaLmMs 93-94


Pause for Thought
When we look around at the world we are living in what should we see? Psalm 94:20 refers
to a ‘throne of destruction’ — in other words governments doing or planning something we
know to be a disaster, and even backing it up by fresh laws to give it a colour of rightness.
What should we see? Or suppose we ourselves are ‘up against it’ through bad or ill-minded
employers? What should we see? Psalm 93 replies, we should see a God of unimpaired
sovereign rule, far, far superior in power to any, every or all forces on earth. The ‘breakers’
pounding us may seem invincible, but Yahweh on high is mightier. Psalm 94 replies, we
should see a call to prayer, to cry out to the God to whom requital belongs (94:1—2). Are we
to say, then, that we are to live ‘looking two ways’? Yes, provided we understand what this
means. Our first, before-all-else, look is to the real throne where real power resides. “God is
still on the throne’ we used to sing — and the thoughtless accused us of being simplistic! No,
not simplistic, just holding to a simple truth, the greatest and most reassuring truth that ever
was. Our God is king. This is the statement of faith with which to begin every day, and of
which to remind ourselves over and over as the day develops: Our God Reigns! Look into
the face of disaster or ill-mindedness and affirm the truth. And let the truth hold you firm.
There is no greater resource for the troubled day than ‘I believe in God the Father Almighty’.
Nor is there a more practical rejoinder to challenges at whatever level — governmental, civic,
personal — than that to ‘leave it’ (Romans 12:19) to the God to whom vengeance belongs.
Leave it to him in the exercise of constant, urgent, trusting prayer. He is over all powers, he
is the Creator (94:9), redeemer (14), carer (17), the God who is on our side (18-19), who
knows how to dig pits and place them suitably (94:13). The God of top-security (94:22).
268 Day 43 — PsaLms 93-94


Pause for Thought
When John commands his readers to ‘keep yourselves from idols’ (1 John 5:21) he is looking
beyond the mere outward fact of physical representations of ‘gods’ in wood and stone
to the supposed reality behind them. In this sense, the ancient ‘gods’ which the psalms
inveigh against are extraordinarily relevant today. Baal makes the most obvious connection.
Mountain tops belonged to him (Psalm 95:4) because his worship required visibility. It
had to be performed where he could see it. You see, Baal was not a person but a force,
the force that guaranteed fertility — for humans, animals and land. The only way to try to
make this important force operate was to do, visibly, on earth what you wanted Baal to do
from heaven — hence Baal sanctuaries concentrated on the sexual acts of human fertility
hoping that Baal would see and copy. It was called imitative magic. If Baal took the hint, the
economy prospered. And there, indeed, is the point: wherever nothing is more important
than ‘the economy’; where ‘market forces’ are the primary factors; where the ‘gross national
product’ is what really matters — Baal is still worshipped. Should we also say that where sex is
exalted out of all proportion, Baal is worshipped? Where materialism reigns supreme? Or we
trust our bank balances for security? Tiamat ruled the sea (95:5) — the sea with its constant,
powerful battering against the defences of the habitable land. Tiamat was the god of success
by power. So then wherever physical prowess is the priority, where problems are to be solved
by militarism and domination, Tiamat is still on the throne. At a local level Tiamat is the god
of the bully, the ruthless pursuit of the ‘rat race’, the business empire which trampled on its
competitors. Molech, with his dreadful rituals in the depths of the earth (95:4), is the god
of things done in darkess or in hiding — wherever the occult is ‘god’ — or there is a secret life
under whatever cover (Ephesians 5:8-12). May we see to it that for us the deep places are in
‘his hand; the heights belong to him, and the sea is his!’
Day 44 — PsaLms 95-96 


Pause for Thought
There can be no salvation until God declares himself satisfied. Put like that, it makes sense,
does it not? If God were indifferent to our sin, we would not need saving. Rather, he would
say, ‘Oh, what does it matter? Let’s not bother!’ But his holiness (97:12) will not let him take
that view. Our sin does matter — simply because he is what he is. Right, then, salvation has
to satisfy holiness or it is not salvation. Psalm 97 focuses in on Yahweh’s own and terrible
righteousness: it is the foundation of what he is (2), inherent in the very nature of things
(6), and drastically dangerous to his enemies (3-4). Salvation must — if it is real salvation
— satisfy that righteousness. Psalm 98 says that it does. Salvation itself is a work of holiness
(98:1); when Yahweh makes known his salvation, he is revealing his righteousness (2). To
such a complete extent does his salvation meet his righteous requirements that ‘salvation’
and ‘righteousness’ are parallel terms — different words describing the same thing. We can
therefore confidently say that the holy God is satisfied to look on him (Jesus) and pardon
me — satisfied, the very heart of salvation! Look at Hebrews 12:22—24 (Nxjv). We are called
‘just’ and ‘made perfect’, and the proof of this is that we live, without fear, in the presence of
‘God the judge of all’. The supreme Judge himself is content to have us! Satisfied! Now we
can feel the rightness and force of Psalm 97:10—12. We are called ‘the righteous’ because that
is our status in his presence — in New ‘Testament terms,
Clothed in His righteousness alone,
Faultless to stand before the throne.
Isn't it very obvious, then, that we are called on to ‘hate evil’ and to rejoice in that which
brings the holiness of our God to mind?
Day 45 — PsaLms 97-98 
278 Day 46 — PsaLMs 99-100


Pause for Thought
From earth’s wide bounds, from ocean’s furthest coast,
Through gates of pearl streams in the countless host,
Singing to Father, Son and Holy Ghost,
Allelujah! Allelujah!
That is what Psalm 100 celebrates. Isaiah (24:14-16a) heard the pilgrims sing as they
picked their way through a broken earth to their home of bliss, and he caught more than a
glimpse of what awaited them (Isaiah 25:6-10a). Paul foresaw the gathering from a different
and altogether more wonderful perspective — the union of all Jesus’ people at his blessed
Return (1 Thessalonians 4:15—17). John was actually allowed to see the eternal reality of
the innumerable company, their white robes, their palm branches of welcome; to hear their
shouts of acclamation and acknowledgement of their God-wrought salvation; to marvel
at the blood that cleansed their robes, and to learn of the Lamb who was their Shepherd
(Revelation 7:9-17); and finally to see the heavenly Zion itself (Revelation 21:2, 27),
a city bright;
Closed are its gates to sin;
Naught that defileth ...
Can ever enter in.
Today’s ‘thought is not to be ‘lost in wonder, love and praise’ as Wesley puts it, but to be
‘found in wonder, love and praise’, reminding ourselves that though as pilgrims we are still en
route, nevertheless it is our privilege, even now, to savour our citizenship (Philippians 3:20) —
to live in the night as if in The Day (Romans 13:12), and in our resident alienship here as at
home in the eternal Zion (Hebrews 12:22). Two elderly friends of mine had the privilege of
an invitation to Her Majesty’s garden party at the palace. A kindly parking attendant, noting
their age, pointed them to a gate off the car-park. “Go in that way. It will save you a long
walk.’ ‘What"” said they. ‘What!! Do you think that with the Queen’s invitation in our hands
we are going in by a back gate!!!’ Revelation 22:14.
Day 46 — PsaLMs 99-100 

Pause for Thought
Nowadays Psalm 101 would be called ‘David’s Mission Statement’. We can picture him at
the start of his monarchy setting out the sort of king he intends to be, the ‘court’ he will
assemble, and with what objectives he will rule his people. The fact that — in the Bible's
honest way — we know how he failed, does not take away from the fact that this is a noble
statement, and one from which every one of us, whether in leadership or simply in the course
of influence, can draw lessons. We cannot, of course, set about purging society as David
vowed (101:8), but we can pray that our leaders will do so: like the old prayer says, ‘the
punishment of wickedness and vice and the maintenance of godly living and virtue’. We are,
though, often in a position to determine who our close associates will be — or our marriage
partners (6-7). One thing, however, is vital — to start where David started. How often have
we heard it said today that what a person is and does in private is his business, and does not
effect his public duties? David would not agree! See how he began with the ‘private man’, his
life of praise with God (1), his domestic and personal ideals (2-4). David knew that what he
was in secret and in private and at home shaped the man he hoped to be in public. And this
is the main way in which his ‘Mission Statement’ speaks to each and every one of us. It is
what Jesus put in his perfect way when he said, “Cleanse the inside of the cup and dish, that
the outside of them may be clean also’ (Matthew 23:26, NxJv) — not, in fact, a good policy
for the washing up, but an essential truth about holy living: everything starts on the inside.
It is exactly as Proverbs 4:23 says!
286 Day 47 — PsaLMs 101-102


Pause for Thought
Psalm 103 is not unique in the psalms of David but like, for example, Psalm 145, it is
an exercise in sheer concentration on Yahweh, without mention of circumstances good
or bad, no reference to enemies. Just Yahweh, his benefits and sufficiencies. The three
wonderful comparisons in verses 11-13 tell us everything. The first concerns height, the
second distance and the third parenthood. Just as the heavens overarch the whole earth,
so Yahweh's unfailing, committed love prevails. The same verb is used of the floodwaters
(Genesis 7:18-20) irresistibly covering the earth and swamping every opposition. Just so
his love is always there (overarching) and is an active force fighting like an armed man on
our side, irresistibly sufficient for every opposition and eventuality. ‘East is East and West is
West, and never the twain shall meet.’ I don’t know what the poet meant, but geographically
the words are correct. Micah (7:19) saw all our sins in the depths of the sea (like atomic
waste sunk where it can do no more harm). David went one better: the distance is infinite,
never ending; our sins are gone without trace, irrecoverable, never to be located. Verse 13 is
best of all: ‘like a father has a mother’s passionate love for his sons’. The word ‘compassion’
(rachamim) belongs to the same word-group as rechem, a womb, and we see it in action in
1 Kings 3:26. Here is perfect parenthood, father and mother all in one, Joseph as well as
Mary. Yahweh's love is thus an overarching, constant, powerful, active love; it is a saving
love, taking our sins from us, bearing them away to such a place as is ever infinitely beyond
reach. And it is a fullness of love, a love that lacks nothing that makes true, perfect love what
it is, a love of welcome, protection, warmth and strength; passion and steadfastness is equal
proportions. “There is no love like the love of Jesus.’
Day 48 — PsaLM 103
 Day 49 — PsALM 104


Pause for Thought
Everywhere we look in the world around we should see God. This is very likely contrary to
the way we were taught at school. Mechanism reigned supreme! What caused rainfall: why
rain bearing clouds were driven higher by mountains — or was it that they dropped lower as
the land fell away? I can’t remember, but it was all a matter of cause and effect. River valleys
were the result of the movement of glaciers, weren't they? Or was it water-erosion? Well,
Psalm 104 has lovely news for us: whatever ‘tools’ he may or may not have used, God the
Creator did it all. Mechanistic explanations of rainfall may well be clever, and speak to us of
the wisdom and art of the Creator, but how much more splendidly marvellous it is to say that
‘he waters the hills from his high rooms’! Talk about the food chain? Who set it up but the
transcendent God who cares whether lions get their meat? Look at the dark clouds massing
and approaching. The Creator is walking towards us. Sentiment tells us we are ‘nearer God’s
heart in a garden’ — how true, for the garden of Eden shows us he loves horticulture — but his
heart is also in sunrise, seed time and harvest, wind, storm, earthquake, thunder. No aspect
of ‘nature’ is without the immanent God, just as no part of nature is big enough to contain
him who is exceedingly great, clothed with splendour and majesty, the giver of life and the
giver of death, controller of oceans and tides, providing crags for wild goats and foliage for
little birds. It is because it is his world that we can live in it with easy minds. We cannot see
what may come over the hills tomorrow, but we do know that whatever happens will happen
in his world where he rules and reigns (Psalm 121:1—2), and where nothing happens without
his say-so. Learn it, my friends; learn it! Learn to look out of your window and see your God.
Day 49 — PsaLM 104 


Day 50 — PSALM 105 207.

Pause for Thought
Psalm105 sees the whole history of Israel to that date as embraced by Abraham. That is where
it found its characteristic origin (6), and at the contemporary end Israel is still the people
of Abraham (42-43). But more: Matthew insists that if we are to understand Jesus and the
gospel we must start with Abraham (Matthew 1:1—2); John sees Jesus as the fulfilment of
Abraham's hopes (John 8:56); for Paul, Abraham is the father of all who belong to Jesus
(Galatians 3:7). Paul (Romans 4:16—25), the writer of Hebrews (11:8-12, 17-19) and James
(2:21—23) all look to Abraham as the exemplar of the life of faith. The psalm does not go
into any details of Abraham's walk with God. It tells us just the cardinal fact that God made a
covenant with Abraham (8), bringing five truths together — covenant, word, oath, statute and
inheritance. God’s ‘covenant’ is not a two-way ‘bargain’: you do this for me and I will do that
for you. No, in Genesis 15 Abram was an immobilised spectator (Genesis 15:12) while God
alone undertook the burden of the covenant (15:17). In Genesis 17:1-7 God alone spoke
the word of multiple promise, the divine ‘oath’ which spelled out the covenant blessings, and
pledged the coming inheritance (17:8). The call to Abraham was to embrace God’s covenant
in a life of obedience — God’s ‘statute’, starting with circumcision (17:9-10). Obedience is
not the way Abraham entered the covenant but the way of life in which he embraced and
made his own the blessings sovereignly pledged to him by God’s freely spoken word. The
word of God explained the covenant to him; obedience to the word of God was the hallmark
of the covenant man. Now think again about that abrupt reference to obeying with which
the psalm ends. Abraham's people were in the covenant of God not by effort or merit, but by
gift and inheritance. Very well, then, let them show it by obeying the word God has spoken.
So, for us too: Acts 5:32.
298 Day 50 — PsaLM 105


Pause for Thought
In effect verse 15 says, “Take care what you pray — you might get it!’ — like the frightful
island in The Voyage of the Dawn Treader where people always get what they dream! This
is what happened in Numbers 11:33. Desire developed into the sin of covetousness — the
‘can't-do-without-always-want-more’ mind-set which the New Testament calls idolatry
(Ephesians 5:5) — and provoked divine wrath (compare James 1:14—15). The only sure way
forward is to safeguard all our prayers with a fervent and heart-felt ‘May your will be done!’
People often say (and think), Do I have to say this every time? And behind that question lies a
misunderstanding. Walk through a graveyard and you will find — is it specially on gravestones
recording a particularly sad death? — “Thy will be done’. Is there a thought lying behind this
that since God is in charge I can only accept life as he orders it, but if I were in charge I
would arrange things better? I fear it sometimes is just like that. What an understandable but
terribly mistaken reaction! Tell me: what makes heaven heaven? Why is it the utterly perfect
place it is? Answer: because the will of God is perfectly done there. When we obey Jesus and
pray, “Your will be done on earth as it is in heaven’, what are we asking? We are asking for
heaven on earth, for the utterly perfect. And when we safeguard our prayers by adding ‘your
will, not mine be done’, what are we doing? We are saying, Don’t give me what I am asking,
give me what you know to be perfect. To say ‘your will, not mine’ does not bring our prayers
down from the heights of what we would generously give ourselves; it lifts our prayers up
to the heights of the best and most generous and totally perfect thing our heavenly Father
has at his disposal. It removes all limitation from our praying, the limits of our wisdom, our
feebleness in asking (Romans 8:26), our sheer boneheaded blindness. It lifts our prayers up
to heaven and asks for heaven on earth.
Day 51 — PsaLm 106 303
Day 52 Read Psalm 107

Pause for Thought
David, of course, was ‘the sweet singer of Israel’ (2 Samuel 23:1), but he was not the only
singer! No, not by a long chalk! Singers hardly come any ‘sweeter’ than the poet who wrote
Psalm 107, do they? This gracious author, so full of confidence in Yahweh, and obviously
intent to bring us to a similar confidence! He has confidence in the greatness of Yahweh's
love. His first thought is to respond gratefully to such committed, unchanging love (1) but
by the end of the psalm it has becomes ‘loves’ (43), a spring tide of love rising, flooding, full.
It is the love which caters for every need and eventuality (8, 15, 21, 31). Do we realize, then,
how greatly we are loved, that under no circumstances — whether externally in our situation,
or internally in our sinfulness — will that love either let us go or fail to be sufficient. When
tempted to think otherwise, hold fast to and discern the meaning of the four pictures in this
psalm, as verse 43 commands. It is the love which hears and answers prayer. We noticed in
the psalm that God’s answers exactly correspond to the need described. So it always is. The
psalm, wisely, does not go into how the need was met: how did he lead the ones who had
gone astray (7)? We are not told — but he did! How did he bring the prisoners out to liberty?
We are not told but he did (14)! How did he send his healing word (20)? We are not told —
but he did! There is an almighty power that raises storms — and stills them (25, 29, compare
Mark 4:37, 39), and it is on our side. The importance of the meditation with which the
psalm ends comes into its own at this point, because it teaches that the four pictures are not
just transformations God happened to make for some people in the past: transforming power
is part of the nature of God himself. It is what he is like!
308 Day 52 — PsaLM 107


Pause for Thought
Do you feel more than a bit battered after reading Psalm 109? Of course you do! But let it
be for the right reason. It is not (as some commentators on the Psalms would suggest) that
every reader is properly horrified at finding such unsanctified human rage and spite inside the
covers of the Bible. No, it is because in Psalm 109 we are listening to the Holy God stating
the consequences of sin and pronouncing the terms of his condemnation and judgment. And
if we like to imagine that his eyes are full of tears as he does so, we are correct. The voice of
David and the voice of the Holy Spirit are one voice, just as Acts 4:25 (Esv, correctly) says
about Psalm 2. This is the biblical realism of David’s praying. He asks (without rancour, in a
truly sinless anger) for what the Word of God affirms is inevitable in the situation of hatred,
opposition, false accusation and malignity he was facing. Sin brings us under the domination
of the wicked one (6), ruins everything about us (7), extends its infection to those linked
with us (9-10), pauperizes (11), leaves us friendless (12), simply because it brings on us the
fruits of our own choices, attitudes and actions (16-20). And (as you readily see) such a
survey does no more than scratch the surface of this terrifying psalm. It is a place into which
so many streams of biblical revelation and warning flow — the cardinal seriousness of sins
of speech, for example, and (a thing that hits and hurts at the family level), if it is true (as
Proverbs 20:7 teaches) that the children of the righteous are blessed, it is equally true that
the iniquity of fathers passes through the channels of genetic solidarity to those we love most
dearly — a moral and spiritual entail that is part of the price of being human. If we recoil on
reading the central section of Psalm 109, let us dwell at length and with all our hearts on the
great cry to God with which the psalm ends.
Day 53 — PsaLms 108-109 

Pause for Thought
Psalm 111:6-8, recalling Yahweh's works, points to their effectiveness (6), how they reflect
his reliability and sound judgment (7), and his truth and righteousness (8). In the middle of
this list it remarks, ‘all his precepts are trustworthy’. His ‘precepts’ are things he commands.
Does this mean that God obeys his own laws? Well, yes, that’s one way of looking at it, but,
at a deeper level, it is saying that just as power, truth, judgment, uprightness are aspects of
the divine nature, so is his law — the law he has revealed for the obedience of his people. His
precepts are not an arbitrary set of random rules that might be otherwise. Every precept of
his law represents a principle of his nature. The easiest place to see this is Leviticus 19. It
seems a very odd chapter, sweeping together all sorts of rules and regulations in a haphazard
sort of way. This is part of its intention. Life itself is haphazard, but whatever turn or twist
it takes, the law of God still rules there; there is always a call to obey. But all these diverse
laws in Leviticus 19 are held together by the repeated ‘I am Yahweh’ (verses 4, 10, 12, 14,
16, 18, 25, 28, 30, 31, 32, 34, 36, 37). And ‘Yahweh’, you will remember, is an abbreviation
of ‘I am what I am’ (Exodus 3:14). In other words, every precept is commanded because ‘I
am what I am’ — so to speak, “This rule is not just what I say; it is what I am.’ You must keep
it in order to fulfill the basic requirement (Leviticus 19:2) that ‘you shall be holy because I
Yahweh your God am holy’. If we are to be like him we must obey the revealed law which
expresses who and what he is. When we conform our lives to his law we are living in his
likeness. This is exactly how Psalm 112 grows out of Psalm 111. The God-fearer delights in
his commandments (112:1), or, as the Lord Jesus Christ put it: If you love Me, keep My
commandments. ... He who has My commandments and keeps them, it is he who loves Me’
(John 14:15, 21, Niv).
Day 54 — PsaLMs 110-112
320 Day 55 — PsaLMs 113-116


Pause for Thought
The Bible makes no secret of the fact that life on earth can be a troubled existence, and that
life’s troubles are no cause for surprise. James calls us to joy in trial (James 1:2—4) because it
is God’s plan for our spiritual perfecting. Peter (1 Peter 4:12) tells us it is nothing strange:
it is the way the Master went; shall not the servant tread it still? And what does Psalm 116
teach? A great deal, indeed! The writer can look back over the whole period of the trial and
say without hesitation: ‘I believed’ (10) — a strong, undeveloped statement, a maintained
position of faith. Like Jesus, when he asked his awesome question, ‘why?’ (Mark. 15:34),
was careful to preface it with ‘My God, my God’, a double affirmation of sustained faith.
Not a thing we always do! Yet what a lesson to learn! To look into teeth of the storm and say
‘I believe’. Come what may, this is not going to knock me off course. Here I stand! In the
psalm the writer’s faith found expression in rest: Come back to your rest (7). Don’t let the
storm drift you from your moorings; come home to God. And inside that enclave of security,
give yourself to prayer (4, 13, 17). Please be aware that none of this is easy. It contradicts
our fallen nature — which is always to turn from God to ourselves, to rehearse our grievances
rather than to pray. But, above all, in Psalm 116, the time of trouble is a time of spiritual
determination and commitment, an opportunity to decide to make spiritual progress (look
again at the affirmation with which the psalm opens, ‘I love’), to come out of the testing
loving him more than ever: more aware of his grace, righteousness, compassion (5); more
disciplined in walking in his presence (8-9), and keeping our promises to him (14, 18); more
public in our testimony (14); closer to Calvary and the one great, all-sufficient sacrifice (17);
drinking ever more deeply from the cup of salvation (13).
326 Day 55 — PsaLMs 113-116


Pause for Thought
When the New Testament finds Jesus in something from the Old Testament it is always
worthwhile going back to look at the Old Testament context, where we will discover how
exactly the Scriptures are being quoted and what a fuller portrait of the coming Messiah
emerges. This is richly true, for example, of the list of quotations from the Psalms in Hebrews
1, and notably true of Psalm 118. The notes added above on verse 10, for example, called
attention to Psalm 2:2 and Acts 4:27, but when we look at everything Psalm 118 says about
the Davidic king, we see what was then ‘writ small’ of him was finally written in cosmic and
eternal letters by the King himself. Follow this nine-fold portrayal through into the New
Testament: the king prayed under extreme pressure and was answered (verse 5; Hebrews
5:7); he was confident against all comers (verses 10-14; John 18:36); he overcame through
the Name (verse 12; John 10:25; 17:12); faced one particular, individual foe (verse 13;
John 12:21; 14:30); found Yahweh’s help, strength and salvation (verses 14-16; John 6:57;
8:29); came through deadly danger alive (verse 17; Matthew 28:5-7); endured Yahweh's
‘chastening’ (verse 18; Isaiah 53:10; John 18:11; Hebrews 5:8); was qualified to enter the
gates of righteousness (verses 19-21; John 16:8—10; Hebrews 5:5; 6:19; 9:24; 10:20); was
rejected by human judgment (verse 22a; Matthew 21:42; 1 Peter 2:7); became the chief
cornerstone (verse 22b; Matthew 21:42; Acts 4:11; Ephesians 2:20). Was the earlier king
aware that his experiences were predictive and anticipatory? Probably not, but we speak, do
we not, of ‘coming events casting their shadow before them’ and this is what happened right
through the Old Testament. Historical events and significant persons all took the shape they
did within the shadow of the One to come. The whole Bible is about Jesus.
330 Day 56 — PsaLms 117-118


Pause for Thought
It is easy, in Psalm 119, to pay so much attention to the lines which contain the key-word
which describes Yahweh’s truth — ‘word’, ‘teaching’, commandment, etc. — that we overlook
what the parallel line says. Look, for example, at verse 2: line one is hugely important in
commending to blessing those who ‘preserve Yahweh's testimonies’. Of course we dwell
on the word ‘testimonies’. What an assertion! God himself has gone into the witness box
and has personally born witness to what he affirms to be true and what he looks for in his
people by way of obedience: his teaching and his commandments. That’s what our Bibles
are: God's personal testimony! But then there is the other, accompanying line —a line further
describing the testimony-preservers, ‘those who seek him with their whole heart’. The verb
‘seek’ is imperfect tense, describing recurrent, repeated action, a customary feature of life.
And what are they doing consistently? They are ‘seeking him’ — they are regularly, consistently
frequenting where he is known to be. They are found ‘in’ the word of God not for the word’s
sake (precious though it ever is), but for his sake, because when we are ‘in’ his word we meet
with him. Years ago the Scripture Union annual card used to include helpful ‘pointers’ for
our Bible Reading — is there a promise to believe, an example to follow, a sin to avoid? Things
like that. Best of all is ‘a truth about Jesus to learn’. In one of his books, Bishop J. C. Ryle
warns against the peril of self-satisfaction in just ‘moving the book mark on a page’. And it is
a peril, to preen ourselves on keeping up the habit. Here is the antidote: has our Bible reading
brought us nearer to our Lord? Have we actually spent time with him? Do we know him
better than we did thirty minutes ago? ‘Preserving his testimonies’ is not putting them into
the freezer! It is finding them a succulent meal whereby we ‘feed on his word’.
Day 57 — PSALM 119: 1-24 

Day 56 — PsaLmM 119:25-48


Pause for Thought
All the connections of one thing with another in verses 41-48 of Psalm 119 merit our
thought, but the most striking thing about the waw section is that in essence it only makes
one supreme connection. The opening verse (41) is a concise description of a converted
person: one who has been confronted by the unfailing, committed love of God, and has
benefited from the divine activity of salvation — all as described by the word of God. The ‘and’
with which the verse begins tells us that this is the additional ingredient at every moment and
in every circumstance of our lives. But what are (as Hebrews 6:9 would call them) ‘the things
which accompany salvation’? In effect, just one: ‘the word’ (42), the ‘word of truth’ (43),
‘your teaching’ (44), ‘precepts’ (45), ‘testimonies’ (46), ‘commandments’ (47, 48), ‘statutes’
(48). The converted life is life obsessed with revealed truth — an understanding of it which
enables us to reply to critics (42) — a personal, confident commitment (43b) which makes
us a safe deposit for the word (43a). It enables obedience (44), diligence (45), unafraid
testimony (46), elation, love as we open our Bibles (47), and a life with God: with the word
of God as its central and controlling factor (48). Picture the great George Muller on his knees
before his open Bible, so that he could worship God in the light of his truth, and turn what
he was reading into prayer and praise. It is all a far cry from perfunctory daily Bible reading,
is it not? But why should it be? And why should you and I not be different? Well, mainly
because we love our beds too much to start the day with God or to end it with real time in
his presence. This amazing waw section of Psalm 119 would prove revolutionary if only we
would listen to it.
340 Day 56 — PsaLm 119:25-48


Pause for Thought
It is an association of thought frequent in Psalm 119, but it comes five times in today’s
reading: the link between seeking God and dwelling on God’s word — or, in the reverse order,
the link between pondering the word and reaching after God himself. Verse 55 is one of two
‘night-time’ verses. It feels like an unexpected wakefulness, bringing with it the recollection
of Yahweh’s name — his work of redemption (Exodus 3:15; 6:6), the Passover and the blood
of the Lamb — but pondering the name leads to a fresh commitment to obey Yahweh's truth.
Verse 62 seems more like a deliberate setting of the alarm clock for the ‘wee small hours’, so
as to engage in a session of worshipful thanksgiving, but it is driven by a preceding awareness
of Yahweh’s revealed truth in all its rightness. Then there are three verses which agree how
rich and bountiful Yahweh is — his sufficiency as our ‘portion (57), the way his unfailing
love meets us at every turn of the earthly pathway (64), his sheer goodness (68). But these
realisations drive us to commitment to his word (57) and make us long to know more (64,
68), which is only possible if Yahweh himself be our teacher. Each of these verses is important
in and of itself, but their united message is the most important of all. It is so desperately easy
to read the word of God just as a habit (moving the book-mark forward!), or to satisfy our
pleasure in learning more, becoming more familiar with the great book. At one level both of
these are praiseworthy, but the Lorn’s intention is that his word should lead us to himself;
that the outcome of every session of Bible reading is that we are now closer to him than
we were, and know him more fully that we did. But, equally, the other way round. All our
experience of God — every new sense of closeness, every fresh ambition to walk with him —
everything must be governed and controlled, dominated by his word of truth, like Jesus said
(John 15:7): ‘if you abide in me, and my words abide in you.’
344 Day 59 — PsaLm 119: 49-72


Pause for Thought
‘The opening verse of today’s reading (73) links two thoughts together: first he has made us;
secondly, may he grant us discernment so as to learn his commandments. He made us, the
Bible says, in his own image. Our true life is to express that image; anything else is a falling
short of the ideal. Hold that thought in your mind and consider something else: God’s law
is what it is because he is what he is — this is the teaching of the marvellous Leviticus 19,
where all life is assembled and brought under the appropriate commands of God. But each
command is enforced by the statement ‘I am Yahweh’ — in other words ‘I am what I am’
(Leviticus 19:2, 3, 4 etc.; Exodus 3:14-15). The law of God is another way of expressing the
image of God. We, by creation, express his image in personal terms; the law expresses his
image in terms of commandments. The law says, Do this and you will be like him; obedience
to the law is our way of living according to our true nature. Now look at verse 88: In his
love he imparts his life to us in order that we may do what he says. This is God’s highest and
best will for us. So often when we say we are seeking God’s will we actually mean ‘where’
we should be or ‘what’ we should do. But his will is, first and foremost, who we should be,
‘what manner of persons’ (2 Peter 3:11, Nxjv) — i.e. people true to our ‘real’ nature, those
in whom the image of God is made visible. Finally, re-read verse 96 (and recall verse 45).
“Your commandment is exceedingly wide’. It is the ‘place’ where I can enjoy true freedom,
transcending human finitude, living according to what James calls ‘the perfect law, the law
of liberty’ (James 1:25): ‘perfect’ in that it is perfectly designed to match our true, real nature
(Jeremiah 31:31—34; Hebrews 10:15-17), bringing us ‘liberty’ because obedience triggers
the image of God in us so that we are what we were always meant to be.
Day 60 — PsaLM 119:73-96 

Day 61 — PsALM 119:97-120


Pause for Thought
Recall that Jesus said ‘If you love me, keep [or, you will keep] my commandments’ (John
14:15). Was he thinking particularly about Psalm 119:97—120? Probably not, but there is
no better summary of the central thrust of these verses. Obedience is the required proof not
only of our commitment to the word of God — his revealed truth — but our love for God
himself. The psalm says so; Jesus says so. Take then, almost at random, what Psalm 119 says
here about relating to God’s truth: ‘meditation all day’ (97); consistency in our ‘walk’ because
his word is his teaching (102); emotional delight (103); the use of revealed truth as light on
life's pathway (105) and resource (first port of call, so to say) in life’s threats (107, 109); truth
memorized (109); concern for the whole truth (115, see note 31); seeking God's upholding
so that we may obey — and undeviating concentration on his word (117); devotion to his
word as the passport to his favour (119). We possess his revealed truth: his teaching (97);
what he has revealed of himself, this truth and his way (99, 111, 119); the very word he has
spoken (101); what he designed for our obedience (104); his lamp for the next step, and
his light for the way ahead (105). If we feel we need life and renewal, is it because we have
neglected his renewing, life-imparting word (107, 116)? Love and respect for the word opens
and closes today’s reading (97, 120) and lies close to the centre (113). I need to ask, ‘How do
I stand in the light of all this — and, by the way, how do you stand?’ The fact of the matter —
calling us all to a reassessment of ourselves and our daily use of our Bibles — is that the Word
of God and the God of the Word are inseparables.
354 Day 61 — PsaLM 119:97-120


Pause for Thought
Are you ready to exercise a bit of imagination with me? Each of today’s sections of Psalm 119
has its own very telling way of thinking about the Word of God, his revealed truth as they
possessed it — in our terms, the Bible. In the ayin section (verse 127) it is ‘gold ... fine gold’,
that is to say, inherently precious: not a unique thought in the Bible (e.g. Psalm 19:10) but
not to be treated as commonplace — in Her Majesty’s Coronation Service, ‘the most precious
thing this world affords’. The section pe (verse 130) prefers the imagery of ‘light’. There is
this door, and when we open it light floods out as from a gloriously illuminated room — at
least that is one way of thinking about the picture involved. Finally, tsadhe has a third view:
when revealed truth is grasped it is like taking hold of life itself (verse 144). God’s teaching is
‘truth’ (verse 142), and the truth is a life-imparting agency. So far so good, but now we come
to the imaginary bit! First of all, gold does not fall into our pockets; it has to be panned from
rivers or mined from rocks. It is ‘there’ but it has to be sought and wrought (Proverbs 2:1—4).
Superficial, hurried Bible reading will not do; it is like being where treasure is to be found but
leaving without any treasure to carry off. Stay and do some panning; take your pick and do
some mining. Secondly, stay in the light until your eyes get used to it, and you begin to see
clearly. Again it takes time, does it not? Coming out of darkness into light, we come into a
situation where at last ‘seeing’ is possible, yet we can see nothing because the very light blinds
our eyes until we acclimatize. Thirdly, truth brings life, vitality, new energy, but again, not
without patience. Dare we think of an infra-red ray lamp rather than a reading lamp? It takes
time to work its effects, coming back again and again — but the effectiveness is there, waiting
to benefit the assiduous and persevering. Now here is a word of encouragement: ayin (verse
124), pe (verse 135) and tsadhe (verse 144) pray that Yahweh himself will be with us to teach
us and give us discernment in his truth. When we open our Bibles he is always there, and we
have come into his classroom.
358 Day 62 — PsaLM 119: 121-144


Pause for Thought
Of all ways for Psalm 119 to end could you have guessed a confession of being a lost sheep?
Following all the mighty thoughts contained in this Golden Alphabet! ‘I am a lost sheep ...
seek me!’ But how realistic! How totally true! When all comes to all what we need to be told
is how to deal with the realities of life — and, above all the reality of our own feeble, lost and
ever-failing nature. The hymn-writer teaches us to sing: ‘Prone to wander, Lord, I feel it,/
Prone to leave the God I love ...’ then offers a solution: “Here’s my heart, O take and seal
it ...” Some great act of dedication — and doubtless acts of dedication have their place, but
in most cases they leave the basic situation unchanged. And this is where Psalm 119 scores
so heavily. The wandering sheep seeks a solution in divine action and human obedience: the
searching, rescuing Shepherd and the unforgotten commandments; faithful divine action,
never for one moment abandoning the sheep he has made his own, and faithful human
continuance in revealed truth. The essentials of the personal testimony in verses 173-176
can be called ‘the Wandering Sheep’s Charter’: the vows and commitments with which we
begin our lives in the Shepherd’s care; the vows and commitments renewed at the opening of
every day; the vows and commitments we repeat at the onset of every temptation to wander
— ‘I choose ... I long for ... I delight ... I do not forget your commands.’ And all of this
embraced and filled with prayer: “Let your hand help ... fill my soul with life ... let your
judgments help ... seek your servant.’ Four commitments and four appeals.
364 Day 63 — PSALM 119:145-176


Pause for Thought
Coming events cast their shadow before them, says the proverb, and we ought to expect that
the New Testament revelation of God as the Holy Trinity prompted some foreshadowings.
But think carefully. The revelation of God as ‘Father, Son and Holy Spirit’ only comes with
the New Testament — first at the baptism of Jesus, when he, the sinless one, was ‘numbered
with the transgressors’ (Isaiah 53:12) by coming to John the Baptist. No amount of hunting
through the Old Testament as such will bring that revelation to us. We may wonder at the ‘us’
of Genesis 1:26; take note that the Old Testament speaks of a God who ‘is Hosts’. Hebrew
uses the idiom of repetition to express a superlative or that which is the ‘whole truth’ about
something, consequently the ‘Holy, Holy, Holy’ of Isaiah 6:3 — the only time a superlative or
comprehensive claim needs to be raised to the power of three. As to its significance, however,
the Old Testament is silent. But, looking back from the New Testament, we can affirm
that the Yahweh of the Old Testament is not to be thought of as ‘just’ “God the Father’; he
is the Holy Trinity Incognito: Father, Son and Holy Spirit waiting to be revealed; God to
the power of three; ‘hosts’ concentrated into the almighty unity of the Three Persons. The
same applies to Psalm 121, with its beautiful meditation on Yahweh as Creator, Redeemer
and Companion, a perfect but totally concealed forecast of Father, Son and Holy Spirit —
concealed, but one we can grip to ourselves as we venture on pilgrimage in this uncongenial,
hostile and threatening world. What a way to start each day! What a way to face every
eventuality! St. Patrick knew all about it when he sang his ‘breastplate’ hymn — and we can
do the same as we make his words our own: ‘I bind unto myself today, the strong Name of
the Trinity ... the Three in One, the One in Three.’
370 Day 64 — PsaLMs 120-122


Pause for Thought
Hezekiah’s tunnel was one of the most amazing feats of civil engineering in the ancient
world. Jerusalem was in a naturally fortified position with its girdle of high hills (Psalm
125:1—2) but it has an elementary vulnerability in that its water-supply was an overground
conduit from the Pool of Gihon into the city. An enemy who could not take the city by
assault could deprive it of water — and just wait! To remedy this defect, Hezekiah’s engineers
dug through 643 metres of rock. Starting from the two ends, they wonderfully met in the
middle! The length of the tunnel was almost double that of a direct line from source to
reservoir, because the tunnellers turned this way and that to avoid difficulties or to follow
natural fissures. But they met in the middle! A cause for joy and pride? So the Jerusalemites
thought (Isaiah 22:1—2a), but Isaiah, who watched the work in progress (22:8—11), saw the
tunnel as the unforgiveable sin (22:14). Now why should that be? Well think of the whole
picture: Jerusalem was the city Yahweh had chosen to make his name dwell there. When he
made that choice, did he not know all about its vulnerable water-supply? Did he make a
mistake? No, he made a promise — straight to Hezekiah too! ‘I will deliver ... this city from
the hand of Assyria, I will defend this city’ (Isaiah 38:6). Did Hezekiah trust the promise?
No, he dug a tunnel! The unforgiveable sin is failure to trust Yahweh's promises.
374 Day 65 — PsaLms 123-125


Pause for Thought
As young Christians my wife and I were set back in our Christian understanding and growth
by some very gifted preachers who came along telling us (in effect) that sanctification was a
matter of ‘letting go and letting God’. Or as the hymn says, ‘sanctified by faith in Jesus, not
by effort of my own’. And, accordingly, we presented ourselves as we were told that Romans
12:1—2 required us to do — we sat back and waited for it to happen, which, of course, it
did not: not that Jesus is unable to do so, but that it is not the Scriptural way. To want an
easy way to perfection is as old as Psalm 126, and is explicitly rebutted there. It is natural
to the believing heart to want heaven on earth — and to want it now. So we identify easily
with the prayer ‘bring back our captivity like watercourses in the Negeb’(4). There they are,
at one moment dry as dust, and, next moment, flooded with water. What could be more
marvellous, and one glad day it will be so: when we see him we shall be like him (1 John 3:2),
but not yet. Now is the time for the disciplined tasks of sowing the word of God, accepting
the hardships that move us to tears, looking forward to the day of loud shouts and abundant
sheaves. Planting the seed of the word of God includes sharing that word with others — the
duty of testimony — but it neither begins nor ends there. James 1:18, 21—22 is our great
teacher: verse 18 tells us that we were brought to new birth by God’s word (compare John
15:3). This is the creative word which at the beginning said, “Let there be light, and there was
light’, and in the individual case of each believer, ‘shone in our hearts to give the light of the
knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ’ (2 Corinthians 4:6). Now then,
teaches James 1:21, be decisive and ‘receive the implanted word’ — yes, consciously take on
board that which you already have. If you like, feed on what God has already said, and then
(James 1:22) ‘be doers ... not hearers only’. You have the word in your heart, make sure there
is a crop to be reaped. When James wrote, he was living in the spirit and reality of Psalm
125 —and so should we.
Day 66 — PsaLMSs 126-128 

 Day 67 — PsaLMs 129-131


Pause for Thought
Yahweh has three companions. They never leave his side; he never comes without them. First
mentioned is ‘forgiveness’ (Psalm 130:4), a word always used of sin and divine forgiveness — a
word, therefore, of relationship. Yahweh has been offended by our actions, but has pardoned
the offence and restored the broken relationship. Then there is the personal word, ‘committed
love’ (130:7). Unlike its companion word, rachamiym, ‘compassion’, which refers to ‘being
in love’, chesedh, committed and unchanging love, is the love which makes a promise for
life, the love which stays the same ‘for better, for worse, for richer for poorer’. Yahweh's third
companion is ‘ransom’ (130:7), the sufficient price which covers the need, buys back the
kidnapped one, satisfies any lawful claim. We can call it, for convenience, the legal word.
Of course, when we call these Yahweh’s companions, we really mean that they are part and
parcel of Yahweh himself; they declare what he is. When we come to him in all our sin and
unworthiness, we enter a rich company. When he comes to us in our sin, he comes not to
condemn but to love, ransom and forgive — and that is the proper ‘order’ of the words: the
personal (love), the legal (ransom) and the relational (forgiveness). Everything else flows from
the inexplicable basis: he loves us (Deuteronomy 7:7—8); and because he loves us he himself
provides and pays the ransom price, so that forgiveness full and free floods over our guilty
souls. If it occurred to you to wonder how we could ever rest, unworried, calm, content, in
his presence, as in Psalm 131, ask his three companions.
384 Day 67 — PsaLMs 129-131


Pause for Thought
The striking simplicity and simple beauty of Psalm 134 make it a supremely wonderful
conclusion to the Songs of the Great Ascent. How easy it is to picture a family group reaching
the city in the evening of their pilgrim journey, with the youngsters clamouring to go straight
to the Temple. Father is adamant, “You've had a long enough day. Tomorrow will be soon
enough.’ But the youngsters are too canny for that, and know that mother will be a softer
touch! “Of course they want to see the Temple. Another late night won't hurt them.’ And they
arrive in time to see the entrance of the night-priests, to join in the greeting for their blessing,
and they stay late enough to hear the blessing pronounced on each one of them — and all
in the dark security of the city which has been their goal all along their pilgrim way. Would
they not indeed feel that all the blessings and securities of the Maker of heaven and earth
were indeed enfolding them in that sacred enclosure and in the soft darkness of that night?
All his irresistible will as Creator, all his sovereign power, all his resources — and (coming
out of Zion as its source) all the mercy and grace of his great salvation. All worship should
be like that: a ‘blessing’ of Yahweh, a review of his character, his grace, his saving power, his
providential care, the blood of the sacrifice he has provided and ordained; the rest he gives
to his beloved as he welcomes us into his house and home. “To behold the fair beauty of the
Lorn’ (Psalm 27:4). Look again at Revelation 1. There were seven lamps. What were they
illuminating with their complete light? The light was directed inward, to reveal the beauty
and glories of the One ‘in the midst of the lamp-stands’.
Day 68 — PsaLMs 132-134
Day 69 Read Psalms 135-136

Day 69 — PsaLMs 135-136


Pause for Thought
Let’s face it — our immediate reaction to twenty-six statements that Yahweh's love is eternal,
committed and changeless is ‘boring’. We tire of the repeated refrain, but it ought not to
be so. His love for us is one of the high points of the Bible, and, by rights, we should be
progressively and increasingly thrilled. Try it again. Read the psalm, revel in the refrain —
not like a repetitive, parrotted ritual but as a wondering and exciting affirmation. It is the
abiding grounding of the whole work of God, creation to new creation; it is the reason for
every single thing he has ever done. It is the comforting, reassuring truth for the difficult day,
when we walk through the wilderness (136:16); it is the inexplicable reason for the great day
when our particular Sihons and Ogs fall (19-20), or we experience a bit more of our eternal
inheritance (21-22). In two ways Psalm 136 goes beyond Psalm 135. Whereas Psalm 135
is restricted to Zion, and the rest of the world consigned to useless ‘gods’, 136:25 extends
Yahweh's benevolent love to ‘all flesh’. The thought is not elaborated, but it is there, and some
day the Bread of Life will be on offer to a whole loved world (John 3:16; 6:35). Verse 23 puts
its finger on a different issue — ‘our lowliness’. If ever we sing in our hymn, ‘Jesus, what didst
Thou find in me/That Thou hast dealt so lovingly?’ the answer is as early as Deuteronomy
7:7-8: he ‘set his love on you’ ... ‘because [he] loves you’. The answer is as total as Psalm
136. Love to the power of 26! Not in our greatness, worthiness, importance, significance
— whatever — did he love us, but in our negligibility, when we were ‘without strength ...
sinners ... enemies’ (Romans 5:6-10). “Love to the loveless shown,/That they might lovely
be’— becoming like the God we worship.
394 Day 69 — PsaLMs 135-136


Pause for Thought
The three very different psalms in today’s group can each contribute a leading thought to a
unified picture of living in this world. The heart-wrenching sadness of Psalm 137, living in
the aftermath of a day of defeat; the simplicity of worship in Psalm 138, reacting to a recent
victory; and the call of Psalm 139 to side with Yahweh against the sin and sinners that despoil
his world. It all amounts to the (old-fashioned sounding) summons to be separate. We find
it easy to identify with those ill at ease in the alien world of exile in Babylon, but do we feel
it in our world where we are ‘immigrants and resident aliens’ (1 Peter 2:11)? We are as much
in exile as ever they were but we fit so snugly into our world that no one is aware that our
citizenship is elsewhere (Philippians 3:20). In Psalm 138 the kings of the earth are there to
be defeated, not lauded or welcomed. They are the strongholds to be won, for in Psalm 139
we can easily test ourselves: would we dare to pray the prayer, and make the affirmations of
verses 19-22? Do we not rather find such confrontation distasteful? We don’t hate sin like
that, do we, or regard with horror the blemishes with which sin and sinners scar the fair
world Yahweh has given us? The Bible is outraged by sins of speech (look it up if you don’t
believe me); we allow the name of Jesus to be blasphemed without turning off our televisions.
Where is the proper radicalism of Psalm 139? Back in the 1940s ‘separation from the world’
was taught and practised in every church that claimed to love the Word of God and the
gospel of Christ. It was, of course, a merely reactive separation — if people did it, we don't!
And it cut us off from many perfectly allowable avenues of life, good gifts of God in their
way. What we need is the distinctiveness of obedience, life shaped by biblical commands,
standards, precepts and examples, being like Jesus.
400 Day 70 — Psatms 137-139


Pause for Thought
The structure of a psalm — the way its various sections belong together, match each other, or
follow in sequence — is itself as much the message of the psalm as any individual verses. Psalm
143 is a good case in point. The psalm is concerned with a particularly troubled period in
David's life, but it is bracketed round by the righteousness of Yahweh (143:1—2, 11-12). His
righteousness, before which we sinners stand condemned and helpless, is here the ground of
our safety and salvation — because it guarantees that he will always act in fidelity to his nature
as the God of grace (1), and he will never abandon his own in trouble (11). In this sense
his ‘righteousness’ points not only to his holy character, but to his utter changelessness. The
next circle of meaning in the psalm is verses 3—4 and 9-10 which are linked by the contrast
between ‘my spirit’ and ‘your Spirit’ (4, 10). Prolonged trouble causes an erosion of human
resilience, a loss of vitality to face another day, but there is always a second factor in every
circumstance, however wearying: the good Spirit of God, seen here as at hand to take the
initiative to bring about a new situation, a land where things are as they ought to be. The end
of our tether is but the beginning of /is! The description ‘a land of uprightness’ is designedly
vague. It is not for us to specify how the Holy Spirit will change our circumstances; it is part
of the way of faith to leave that to him, knowing that he can only do what is good. He always
leads in ‘paths of righteousness’ (Psalm 23:3) — paths that make sense to him. The psalm
contains fifteen petitions (four in each of the opening and closing sections; seven in verses
7-10) — a true lesson in how to face life and deal with difficulty. But the centre ground is the
waiting soul (5) — no petitions here (remembering, meditating, musing, the mute appeal of
the outspread hands) — and the committed soul (6). This is the attitude expressed by ‘until’
in Psalm 123:2, a place of stillness in the middle of the storm.
408 Day 71 — PsaLMs 140-143


Pause for Thought
There is a glorious individualism about Biblical religion. Think of ‘my’, nine times in the
opening of Psalm 18, and its use of the first person pronoun, ‘I love ... I take refuge ... I
call’. Becoming and being a Christian is not just ‘running with the pack’, is it? Conversion is
an individual experience. The great question used to be, ‘Have you received the Lord Jesus
Christ into your heart as your own personal Saviour?’ You and him; your heart, his home.
But there are other dimensions as well as the individual, and the Psalms rarely let us forget.
Psalm 144 is a good example. The first eleven verses are wholly individual: there is personal
trouble to be met, prayer to be made, deliverance sought, but verse 12 abruptly brings us
into the bosom of the family, and verse 15 widens the scope to Yahweh's people and their
corporate blessedness. We are saved into the whole company and family of the redeemed.
We do not get converted and then set about thinking of church membership; as soon as we
are saved we are family members. Indeed Ephesians 2:4—6 opens a thrilling vista: in the mind
and estimation of God, salvation already sits us with Christ and his redeemed in heavenly
places — a situation anticipated when Psalm 23:6 talks about living in Yahweh's house for
ever. Psalm 145 takes us to the final step. It starts, ‘I will extol’ (145:1) and ends ‘All flesh will
bless (21). What a vision!
From earth’s wide bounds, from ocean’s farthest coast,
Through gates of pearl streams in the countless host,
Singing to Father, Son, and Holy Ghost—
It is a visionary hope which will one day certainly be fulfilled; it is also a present task to
which we are called to set our hands. We are born again into the church; we are called and
commissioned to win the world. The balance between Old and New Testaments at this point
is interesting — a balance, not an exclusive approach. In the New Testament, the summons is
to go out (Matthew 28:19); in the Old Testament the task is to attract in, to be the magnetic
people of Deuteronomy 4:5—8. If your church and mine is not worth belonging to why should anyone want to join?
414 Day 72 — PsaLms 144-145


Pause for Thought
It is easy — and right — to get caught up in the excitement of Psalm 150 as its rises to its climax
with the words, ‘Everything that has breath, let it praise Yah!’, and to let the excitement cloud
the fact that the words express an unrealized vision, a ‘would that it were so!’ To realize this is
more than a damper on the glory which we feel ought to mark the end of this glorious book
of the Bible. A wish, at present a non-event on a large scale. Also a solemn question: what do
you propose to do about it? Psalm 106, where the paean of praise starts, is addressed to ‘my
soul’. A call to personal praise. Right, we can do something about that, making sure Yahweh
ever receives from me the praise due to his name. Psalm 107 addresses Jerusalem, a call to
the church to praise, and we can do something about that, making sure our gatherings cater
fervently for the corporate duty of praise. Psalm 148 deals with cosmic praise and looks after
itself.
The voice of prayer is never silent
Nor dies the strain of praise away.
Psalm 149 presents us with the crunch moment — the psalm of evangelistic praise. We are
pretty good, are we not, about ‘shouting aloud in our beds’ (149:5) — enjoying to the full the
restful security of our salvation with all its accompanying joy? But, so to speak, all too often
we have left the sword — the evangelistic thrust of the gospel — downstairs, still in its scabbard.
We have every right to lay our heads on this wonderful pillow. God forbid that we should
ever cease to nourish and refresh ourselves with all our delights and privileges in Jesus, but
Psalm 149:6 sees the two as bound together, the head and the hand, the mouth of praise and
the well-sharpened sword — ‘the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God’ (Ephesians
6:17, Esv). That’s it, then. Praise without the sword is spiritual self-indulgence; the sword
without praise is joyless duty. Together, they are the balanced Christian life. They are also the
way forward to the day when everything that has breath will praise Yahweh.
422 Day 73 — PsatmMs 146-150


