THE NON-ORIGIN AND NATURE OF GOD

The central question of this first chapter is whether or not the idea of a God is even plausible from the standpoint of reason. That is, does it make sense that there’s a God in the first place? It might strike you as odd that I'm starting the book, a book about Christianity, outside of Scripture, expressly away from the Christian God. The first iteration of this book actually had as its first chapter a long study of how we got Scripture, the apocrypha, the early church fathers, and other related matters.  But I'd rather start building this out from the lowest level I can. The old first chapter about Scripture had the right idea, if not the right substance: we have to start outside the Bible, because there are a few showstopper attacks on Christianity that, if not answered, make any further discussion useless. This chapter, thus, is a defense of the rationality of there being a single, divine creator of our universe. “Didn’t you just say in the preface this wasn’t an apologetics book, but instead a teaching book?” Yes I did, and I think you can learn a lot about a castle by laying siege to it! I don’t intend to just argue about bla bla bla metaphysics bla bla bla. My goal is to take you with my on a short journey that may provide some insight into the character of God. 
I must warn you: while short, at about 5,000 words, this first section can be a bit dense. (You will never be more perplexed by reading about apples, although I’d wager if you’ve spent any time in a physics classroom you’ll still dread the spherical cow more.) The rest of the book, when dealing with Scripture and specifically the Christian God, is not so heavy into acronyms and formal¬(ish) logical constructs. There are also a lot of terms that need to be defined here, which also does not really occur in the rest of the book. To that end, if you already find the idea of a God to be entirely plausible, I would rather you skip this chapter than put the book down thinking the whole book is like it. You will miss a connection or finer point or two later on, but I would rather you miss those small bits than the whole book. 
With two paragraphs of probably unnecessary pre-apology out of the way, let's dive in. If we are to question whether a god could be the source of all things, we have to figure out what exactly being the 'source of all things' means (and why all things need a source to begin with). How does one get from ‘origin’ to ‘present?’ Stated simply, by causes and effects. An apple is caused by a tree, and a tree is caused by a seed (at a high level). If we think of history as a chain of cause and effect, what happens when you grab that chain and follow it all the way back? If you went past the first sharpened stick, past the first star to ignite, what would you find?
Before I attempt to answer that, there are three terms that should be defined. The first is literal, absolute nothingness, hereon called literal non-being. No quantum foam, no space, not blackness, literal nothingness. And by the way, you're not supposed to be able to picture it: it's nothing. To make sure this is clear, literal non-being is not even zero, it's nothing. It is not even the database concept of null. Nor is it “simply not there.” There isn’t even a “there” for nothing to be! “Alright, why not just call it nothing then?” Because when I say 'nothing', people have all sorts of ideas what that means, like a vacuum, or quantum foam or other such things, and being precise is important.
The opposite of literal non-being is what I'll call reality, which is the total area that encompasses where there is 'something.' (Our universe is a subset of reality.) Fairly simple, unlike the third term, which is time. The definition I will use here is this: 'time refers to change.' If there is a change, time has passed. If there is no change, no time has passed. Saying "time didn't exist" is therefore meaningless; time only advances with changes; no change and it is paused, for lack of a better word. Being "outside of time" is also meaningless. You can be unchanging, but saying you are "outside of time" means nothing - what would it mean? You cannot be "outside" of something that has no dimensions (which holds no matter what definition of time you use). That's like saying you're outside of math.  Again: 
1.	Literal non-being is true nothingness. 
2.	Reality is every thing and phenomena. 
3.	Time is any change, no matter how minute or small. 
Keep those in mind as we continue. For now, though, back to our chain. Does it, or does it not have a first link? Is there an end to this chain? Well, there must be a first link, for a fairly simple reason: the chain couldn't ever get to now, if it goes infinitely far back. Let’s say you own a house, and find yourself trapped on the roof. A Quixotic fellow approaches with truckloads of turtles, and offers to build a tower of turtles up to you. He starts at the ground, placing one turtle on top of another. After a while, and confusing a bunch of turtles, ta da! They reach you, and you climb down. Ok, easy enough: now take away the ground. Your house is in the void. There is no way for the turtles to ever reach you, because there is no ground for them to start on, and you’d need infinitely many turtles to get to your roof.
Said more rigorously, every moment must wait an infinite amount of time to occur, so there is no "now." Sorta rattles the brain a bit, aye? But that's why time must have a definite beginning. If the past is unbounded, the present could not yet be. Perhaps this is where my mathematics background gets in the way: an infinite is not just a “really large number.” An infinite is a concept, specifically a reference to something being “unbounded.” If the past has no bound, it could never reach us, for “now” would be an unbounded amount of time ago. (I don’t think that helped much. Best to stick to the turtles.)
What about the idea that it's all a cycle? You hear this in popular science a lot, but it’s really just the “there is no first link” option from above dressed up different. First, time is inherently linear. If at T=1 there is a red apple, and at T=2 it becomes blue, and at T=3 it becomes red again, that is a "cycle" but time is still advancing. Just because you cannot distinguish between time steps, or even groups of time steps, does not mean time is not advancing. Time always advances forward, as, remember, it is just change. Changes come one after another. Time moves forward. The cycle started somewhere, as there is a "now." How can I say that? If the cycle did not start somewhere, what does that mean? You guessed it: we have the same problem as there being no first link. Every single action has an infinite history. Infinity and reality do not play nicely. Since that means the cycle started somehow, and isn't a true circle anyway, this idea falls apart quickly as well. Since we are experiencing a now, we can be assured there is a first link, anchoring the chain in the winds of eternity. Let's call that link the First Cause.
 Something, reality in general, cannot come from literal non-being. There is no way for a stable reality to exist if this is possible, as literal non-being has no attributes, so "it" cannot cause, and if "it" could, "it" would always be doing so.  Thus, the first link in the chain, the First Cause, did not 'pop' into existence from literal non-being. Likewise, we know the First Cause cannot have caused itself; this is an obvious contradiction, as it would have existed before it existed in order to do that, which is impossible.  And to state the obvious, it was first, so there was nothing else to have caused it.
If you look around the room, then, you're left with one possibility that causes no contradiction: the First Cause was causeless. Since there was nothing else aside from it, something cannot come from literal non-being, and it causing itself is a logical impossibility… there is no viable explanation aside from it being causeless.    This holds regardless of your leaning, theist or atheist or anythingist. So our First Cause rather quickly changes into the Causeless First Cause (CFC).
Of course, we all now want to learn about the CFC. What was it? What can we possibly know about it? Fortunately, there is one tool we can use to do so: the contradiction. Even describing a time when literally nothing but the CFC was, the contradiction will still be useful. Mind, there were no physics, no set of governing rules. A contradiction, though, is a gold plated guarantee that something is impossible. If I say "I was in my house at 10 am," but someone tells you I was most certainly driving my car at 10 am, you know there is a falsehood present, as both cannot be true (movie style time travel shenanigans or 'your house is your car' riddle solutions – don't torture the analogy). Whenever a contradiction appears, it means you have guaranteed that there is at least one falsehood.    
The first question that needs answering is: why should a Causeless First Cause exist at all? This stumped me for a long time, until I realized: the only way the CFC could exist, is if it would be a contradiction for it to not. Chew on that idea for a moment, it's a very foreign idea. It would be a contradiction for the CFC to not exist. There is no other explanation for a causeless entity to exist. 
Let me make sure you don't get the wrong idea here. I once thought that perhaps the best argument starts in the opposite direction; that there is nothing that could prevent the CFC from existing, and so it does. However the flaw in this reasoning is quite subtle; it winds up pre-supposing the existence of the CFC, much like Descartes' ontological argument. In order to "prevent" a thing from existing, the concept of it must already exist, no? And with nothing but pure, literal non-being… there are no concepts of things. Second, you cannot argue "since it's causeless, it must exist as it has no cause, there's your positive contradiction." This has the same presupposition problem (causelessness is an attribute, and the causelessness of a thing cannot exist before the thing itself), and also opens you up to issues like "why aren't there infinite copies of the CFC?" 
"Isn't that a cause, though? That it would be a contradiction?" Not really, this is much too into semantics for my taste, but let me reiterate: there is nothing checking whether contradictions are occurring and fixing them. They simply are not by their nature. I cannot be in the car and be at home watching tv at the same time. It's not necessary for anything to "enforce" that. Apply that concept to the positive contradiction of the CFC. It simply is. 
I have no analogy for you, and there truthfully cannot be one: the CFC would be the literal only thing for which this is the case, that a contradiction is caused by it not existing. Again, nothing enforces contradictions, like the structure of our universe enforces the laws of physics. (Negative) contradictions are not. The positive contradiction is.
 Someone said of the above: "Alright alright, there's a first link in the chain of cause and effect from now back all the way. That first link is causeless, and is by way of contradiction. I'm not sure why you bothered establishing a reason (or cause) for something you defined as causeless to exist, but sure. I assume at some point we're going to see how this gets to God's viability? Obviously you're setting up for the CFC to be God, but how?" 
A note on this: calling the contradiction bit a 'reason' or 'cause' for the CFC is a misunderstanding of the idea. Like I said, contradictions are not enforced nor do any work. They don't cause or uncause or ride bicycles. So I didn't provide a reason for the CFC's being, I provided an explanation of what being causeless must mean, which will become important in a moment.
The latter part of the question is correct, though! I'm going to use the previous discussion as a way to learn some traits about the CFC. As I go through these traits, you'll probably notice that we're inching ever closer to God. My intent is not to discount other such CFCs, such as perhaps the primordial singularity that caused the theorized big bang, but to demonstrate the possibility of God as the CFC. Remember, no matter which you adhere to, God, god, gods, or none, what I've said thus far still applies.
Let's find something concrete. We know one trait of the CFC for certain: the fact that you and I and everything else besides exists, and this is critically important, means the CFC must have had the ability to cause effects. It was, after all, the first cause - this implies it could have effects. If you allow me to shorthand some thinking, following that idea through a step more gives us this:

1.	It must have the ability to cause effects (changes, advances in time, etc.)
2.	It must have either:
a.	had the ability to create from literal non-being
b.	contained all that would be and is within itself, and had the ability to alter it

This seems reasonable, yes? Given that it can cause change, it must possess one of two abilities: the ability to bring things from literal non-being, or the ability to alter itself. There's no other way for the CFC to cause things; again, it is utterly alone.  But let's examine 2B a bit more closely to see if it holds up. (Spoiler, it doesn’t.)
If we allow for 2B, then that means the CFC is changeable. However, this cannot be the case. The CFC must exist or a contradiction would be caused. That means that everything about the CFC is a result of that idea as well, and if it could alter itself, then whatever it altered must not cause a contradiction if it is changed, so that must not be a part of the positive contradiction, and would not have ever been. This eliminates the possibility that the CFC can change.  It and all its attributes must be or else they would not be. 
Anyway, that leaves us with 2A: that it can create from literal non-being. Now, I know I spent a great deal of time on the impossibility of things coming from literal non-being in the footnotes and body, but that was without any other input. There is no contradiction in something being brought forth from literal non-being by some reason other than itself. 2A doesn't cause any contradictions. 2A does of course run afoul of our understanding of our universe’s physics, that much is certain, but the laws of physics are curious consequences or deliberate underpinnings of the structure of our universe, and when it was just the CFC… none of that was there. So let's see our revised list of required traits for the CFC, that come as a consequence of this section:

1.	It must have the ability to cause change
2.	It must have had the ability to create from literal non-being
3.	It must be:
a.	Purely that which is required by positive contradiction
b.	Unchanging

But what are the limits on 3B, unchanging? Even in Scripture, the Christian God does things. Is movement a change? Is speaking a change? Not of a trait or part of the CFC. Traits here are intrinsic qualities of form. An example of an intrinsic quality of form is say, that a square has exactly four ninety-degree internal angles. You are not altering the qualities of a square by moving it around, nor is a change in the definition of a square caused by rotating it. 
To me, this list is as fleshed out as it can be. Much beyond these, and you start making guesses or the number of options balloons too high, in terms of trying to nail down what must be true about the CFC. We can discuss candidates that do not violate these conditions that might be the CFC, though. As this is a chapter about God from reason, let's consider an aware CFC. I will not be arguing here for why an aware CFC is the only option; that's not the purpose of this chapter, and I’m not sure you can even argue that. I will leave a few brief points on the matter of the big bang, and perhaps the most foundational, unanswered question I raise on the topic, in a footnote for the curious.  My argument is that an aware CFC is simply an option, as it violates none of the conditions above, as far as I can discern. 
An aware, as in, sentient CFC, though, to return to the point, can certainly cause change, as it has will. An aware entity can wield, as in control and apply, the power to create from nothing. What after that, though? The basic premise is viable, but I want to follow the logic a bit farther along the branch of the CFC being aware. Some surprising things fall out as we crank the machine. 
For instance, the CFC must be omnipotent, as in, having no limits to its power. I'll define omnipotence literally as "being able to do everything that is possible." How do I know that? Well, what would cause those limits? There was no physics yet, when there was but one link in the chain. It doesn't change when it acts, so it doesn't require fuel, and it can create from literal non-being. That's all the potential sources of limitation other than intrinsic,  meaning it must be omnipotent barring intrinsic limitations that we can't discover or know. Said again, if it can create from literal non-being, and can't change or be reduced on its own, it must be able to bring forth anything it wants without fuel or energy expenditure. This must be true, as it could cause, and there was no fuel laying around for it to cause with, so it must not have needed any.
Look at this another way: its definition states it is unchanging, yet can act. That means that to act, it does not need to expend energy, and if it need not expend any energy to act, and there are no laws of physics or the like over it… its power is thus maximal. What would it expend? Every component of it is necessary. Alright, so the CFC would reasonably be omnipotent. 
Back to the aware CFC, though. What about the character of such an aware CFC, henceforth called god (the little g is purposeful)? We find ourselves at another branching point of consideration. This god would either be a random actor or a patterned actor. I am purposefully going to arbitrarily exclude the random actor, because if we assume god is not random, we can derive some fascinating items about his character. The random actor would, of course, create a never-ending stream of random things from literal non-being at a perfectly random interval. We're going to continue as if that were not the case. (It could be, though; our universe could simply have been randomly created by the perfectly random god.) But what does non-random mean? It means pattern-having. To an aware being, following a pattern means having a will.  
All 'will' refers to here is that this god follows some pattern by which it uses its power. (Not that it must follow any specific pattern by nature, but more that it is a follower of pattern(s).) That means that a fundamental component of the god CFC is order - patterns require order, after all. 
Since the non-random god is ordered, and we know it must be creative (otherwise nothing would exist)… what else can we derive? There's an uncountable number of potential patterns this god could follow, right? I've asked myself: "what pattern does our non-random god choose to follow? We can't know that. It could be an Odin-esque pattern: create things, then let them kill each other for his amusement." But the answer is in the question. Choice. Our non-random god makes choices. Non-random choice implies preference. And in the absence of external influences, what can be the only determinant of his  preferences, if they are not random? His own fundamental nature, or self (perhaps his 'imagination,' but that would still be self-derived). So god's own nature of being ordered and creative influences his preferences, and god's preferences influence what he defines as good and thus what he does: order and creation.  The traits we commonly associate with goodness necessarily promote order and creation, and those are precisely the traits the specific God this book focuses on exhibits in his nature. 
That is the last insight I believe reason can give us, or needs to give us. There's no reason the CFC would or would not have been a mind (or aware), and since I'm not particularly making an argument of necessity but possibility, that's fine. The branches of what could be, from what must be, do not exclude, and somewhat encouragingly seem to promote, an ordered, creative CFC, if you start along the right branch. Which neatly lines up with the Christian God's priorities, of course: creation and order. 
For fun, I asked chatGPT to try and refute my arguments. It said the following:
1.	Assumptions about causality: The author assumes that everything in the universe follows a cause-and-effect relationship, and therefore, there must be a First Cause. However, this assumption is based on our observations and experiences within the universe, and it may not necessarily apply to the origin of the universe itself.
2.	Jumping to a specific conclusion: The author concludes that the causeless First Cause must be a God or divine creator. While the argument may establish the plausibility of a causeless First Cause, it doesn't necessarily lead to the conclusion of a specific deity. It's a leap to attribute specific characteristics or intentions to this First Cause without further evidence or logical reasoning.
3.	Limited understanding of non-being: The author argues that the causeless First Cause cannot come from literal non-being. However, our understanding of non-being or nothingness is limited, and it's difficult to make definitive claims about its properties or limitations.
4.	Equating positive contradiction with a divine nature: The author suggests that the causeless First Cause must be purely that which is required by positive contradiction. While this may be an interesting philosophical concept, it doesn't necessarily imply a divine nature or attributes typically associated with gods.
5.	Alternative explanations: The author's argument assumes that a causeless First Cause is the only plausible explanation for the existence of the universe. However, there are alternative cosmological theories and hypotheses, such as multiverse theories or quantum fluctuations, that propose different explanations for the origin of the universe without invoking a causeless First Cause.

…Unimpressive, I have to say. I literally say that 2 and 5 aren't what I'm doing – I only argue that a divine creator could fit the bill and follow the reasoning for if it were. Tsk tsk. 4 is essentially the same thing. I never said it did imply divine attributes, but it does not preclude them either. Ok, so what about 1 and 3? Well, chatGPT kinda fumbles with 3: literal non-being can have no properties. That's the whole point. Oops. 1 is chatGPT's best point, actually, but I don't say everything follows a cause-effect relationship, namely, the CFC must be causeless. I in fact did not, though, prove that there must have been only one CFC, I dimly recall discarding the notion of multiple CFCs spawning an "orchard" of cause-and-effect chains that either do or do not interact or intersect in a footnote. The issue is, though, if there were multiple CFCs past one, we suddenly have a problem. If there can be more than one CFC, then there can be any number of them, as mutual exclusion would not be not part of its/their nature by necessity. 
And if the CFC must exist by positive contradiction, and there must be more than one, there would be more than one, and then there would likely be an infinite number of them. Then you have branches dealing with infinite identical CFCs or infinite variable CFCs and branches from there splitting on whether or not they interact and suddenly you're very confused. (I'm pretty sure, also, that you can dismiss "infinite potentially interacting CFCs" out of hand: if they could interact with any probability, and there were an infinite number of them, then every single moment our universe's cause and effect chain would be interacted with by another CFC's cause and effect chain. Why is very simply math that I leave for you to puzzle out in half a minute.)
 It seems more plausible to me that there would be exactly one CFC, no more, no less, but I readily admit intuition is not much help in this realm. So I will grant 1 to chatGPT, sort of. I never said everything had a cause, quite the opposite, at least one thing violates cause and effect. Nor does my argument hinge upon everything but one thing having a cause: it hinges upon our present reality being at the end of a chain of cause and effect.
But again, my point was not to dismiss other concepts of the CFC, simply to demonstrate that there exists a rational, non-contradictory example of the CFC that we would call god, and could recognize as something like the Christian God. To progress, though, I believe it is time to turn to the Scriptures, to see what I view as the aware CFC. Who is God? 
 
THE BIBLICAL GOD, HIS GOAL, AND CREATION

The book now shifts to a discussion about the viability of and non-contradictory nature of the Christian God specifically. If you followed my recommendation and skipped the first chapter, I will summarize it, without defense to keep it light, like so:
If time is a chain of cause and effect, at some point there was and must have been a first cause which had no cause itself. That first cause could only exist by way of positive contradiction, meaning that while negative contradictions must not be, the first cause must be. It could not change, and it could create from literal non-being. Given that, it would necessarily be omnipotent as it needs no fuel and expends no energy to create from nothing. If such a first cause were a self-aware, thinking being, and not a purely random actor, it would have to derive what it wanted from itself. Given that its primary traits are that it can create things, it would value that trait highly. If we again assume it is non-random, then it follows a pattern, and patterns are a kind of order, and we see how such a being could quite conceivably desire creation and order. The Christian God is a being that enjoys creation and order, and we see how he is not excluded from existence by reason. Phew.
This chapter begins with a description of the nature of God, but quickly move on to his goal and what he wants. I do, though, have to make one last remark concerning this and following sections: given that I am after the internal consistency and reasonability of and lack of contradictions in the Bible, I must take at face value that what it says is true. I don't feel like prefacing every single quote from Scripture with, "if Christianity is true." There are portions of the book where I do not take this for granted; those times are when not doing so matters because I'm defending something other than internal consistency. Again, I don't do this at times that I am attempting to make an outward argument, of course, as then I'd get emails about my fallacious reasoning and all that. 
One last general note, I have a tendency here, and I think oftentimes many people can do this accidentally, to describe God and his motives and so on and the person behind it all gets lost. God is a person. He may be able to create a trillion trillion stars that'll cook you from ten million miles away and blind you yet farther still, but he is not a force, he is not an abstract concept or a corpse to be dissected. He lives and he is complete and he speaks. (If Christianity is true, of course.) And God has spoken to us through Scripture. It seems fairly obvious, then, that he would have told us something about himself within it. So, what has he told us? Well, why not start with form, and then move on to personality? After all, when describing aliens in books, characters often start with “big meaty claws” and then “it tried to kill us all!”   At the highest level, he's said that there is a Holy Spirit. There is a Father. And there is a Son. Some call these three the Trinity, some recoil at the mere use of that word. I have no preference for terms; Scripture tells us, as I said, that there is a Father, there is a Son, and there is the Holy Spirit. Each member of the Trinity is God. The Father is God (Romans 1:7). The Son is God (Romans 9:5, John 10:30-33).  The Holy Spirit is God (1 Corinthians 3:16). The Son, who we know as Jesus, is interestingly called 'the Word' as well, in John 1:1, which lays out this separate-but-one logic as well:
"In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God."

Here is an example, from Matthew 3:16-17, where all three act independently of one another: 
"As soon as Jesus was baptized, he went up out of the water. At that moment heaven was opened, and he saw the Spirit of God descending like a dove and alighting on him. And a voice from heaven said, "This is my Son, whom I love; with him I am well pleased."

Here we see Jesus on the ground, we see the Holy Spirit coming down onto Jesus, and we hear the Father in heaven. Three entities. But how do we know they're truly distinct, and not just one in multiple places? For one, the Father and Son are distinct, as the Father has information the Son does not (Matthew 24:36):
"But about that day or hour no one knows, not even the angels in heaven, nor the Son, but only the Father."

Further, in Genesis 1:26, God uses the word "our" - plural.  There are plenty of places in the Psalms where plural and singular references are used together as well. This is often hard to grasp, and indeed the exact way it works for God is certainly impossible for us to comprehend (or else he probably would not be God). I used to have some explanation here about "centers of awareness" and such that… just, even if it was helpful, isn't necessary. I see no point to trying to comprehend the mechanics or nature of God’s form. There are three persons in one and they share one overall will; that’s what we are shown and told. I know you're probably wondering why the guy who spent a whole chapter trying to tease out details about God from reason isn't trying to understand this better, but you must also recognize: I knew when to stop!
Trying to fit God's mechanics in my head is like an ant trying to probe a neutron star with pheromones. Consider: the electromagnetic radiation we know of as light that our eyes detect and our brain processes, is a created thing. You couldn't even see God if he didn't reveal himself with what our eyes can see. Anyways, onwards to things we can comprehend.
So, high level. What else do we know about God? Well, how about his name? God has many names or titles, used at different times. I am a firm believer that you are what you do, and so I must state at the outset, for the majority of these names and titles, they are given in response to something God had done, was doing, or would do. Of course, the most famous of these will be the one he gave in answer to this very question: "I am who I am." Yahweh. Let's see some of the others, though, rapid-fire. You may notice a few themes among them.
1.	El Elyon, God most high, the most exalted, or "God the Sovereign." 
2.	El Shaddai, God Almighty, God of all power.
3.	Adonai, Lord, used in place of Yahweh, sometimes when God deals with gentiles. The transcendent God.
4.	Yahweh-Jireh, the Lord will provide. 
5.	Yahweh-Rapha, the Lord who heals.
6.	El Roi, the Lord who sees. He sees us. He hears us. He is mindful of us.
7.	El-Olam, God everlasting, "from everlasting to everlasting you are God." An Alpha and Omega title.
8.	Jehovah-Nissi, the Lord our banner. This one is slightly harder to define; it is from the story where as Moses held his rod aloft, the Israelites were winning their battle, and when he let it down, they began to lose. Perhaps it would thus be helpful to render it "The Lord, our banner, who we look to, who gives us strength."
9.	Jehovah-M'Kaddesh, the Lord who sanctifies you. To sanctify is to make clean, or pure, or holy. Moses uses the same word to describe what God did with the Sabbath, the holy day, the day of rest, the day of completion, in Genesis 2:3. 
10.	Yahweh-Sidqenu, the Lord our righteousness. I feel it necessary to point out this one is from Jeremiah (33:16), and if you want to feel convicted of your sin, this is the book to read. There's an endless pronouncement of judgement followed by hope. I point that out, because the 'our' is incredibly important here. As Isaiah the prophet suddenly understood when he saw God in his vision, mankind is defined at present by our rebellion and sin. We do not have any righteousness apart from that given to us by God. Thus, this title has ramifications far beyond enlightening us about God's character as righteous and the fountain of righteousness. Do you know what God is talking about when he gives this name? He is talking about Christ, the righteous branch of David. I must, though, continue and leave the ocean of depth in this name for another time. 
11.	Yahweh-Shalom, the Lord is Peace. Shalom is a concept that doesn't quite fit into our conception of the word "peace."  Shalom is not just a cessation of conflict, or pleasant quiet. It is a condition of togetherness with God and a condition of permanent well-being. As with Christ, peace often means between man and God foremost, between human and human secondarily.
12.	Yahweh-Elohim, Lord God, Lord of Lords, ruler of all authorities. An "every knee will bow" type title.
13.	Jehovah-Shammah, the Lord is There. God has a personal presence with us, in us. As we are temples,  so this title was announced at the time God's presence had returned to the Jewish Temple (Ezekiel 48). But you know what? There's something else about this. When I think of God, I often start with him sitting somewhere 'above' the universe (if that word means anything outside a gravity well), and he reaches down through the cosmos to our rebellious mudball of a world to interact with us. But that's not the case as presented by this name; no, he is here. The same guy who made magnetars that'll rip you apart at the molecular level, who shines seven times brighter than the noon Sun, is actively present. 
14.	Yahweh-Rohi, The Lord our Shepherd. A shepherd defends his flock, his flock knows his voice, a shepherd leads them to green pastures. "The Lord is my shepherd; I shall not want."
15.	Yahweh-Saboath, The Lord of Hosts. One could think of a "Host" as a concentration of power, in its most abstract. Often it means "army," for a simple representation of power. The meaning is clear; God commands all power, and all powers are his. 
16.	El-Gibhor, Mighty God. I have saved this one for last, it comes from Isaiah 9:6, and is prophetically speaking of Christ. It says Christ will be called: "Wonderful Counselor [a wonder of a counselor], Mighty God, Everlasting Father, Prince [in the sense of 'administrator'] of Peace." These give Christ his qualifications for ruling, his strength, his relationship with us, and the society he administers. He will have pele, or 'supernatural' in the sense of 'far above human' wisdom. Father references concern, care, and discipline. Peace here is salem, meaning wholeness, completeness.  I feel it worth noting, in verse 7, it is said "The zeal of the Lord of hosts will do this." God guarantees this future with his absolute commitment and absolute power. 

What a very technical list of names! And, frankly, a bit boring, right? I mean I almost feel, reading it back, as if I’m a noble at court listening to the listed titles of the King as he walks to his throne. You are what you have done, as they say. And I cannot help but mention, either, the many perceptions of the Christian God that exist out there. You can walk the streets of a city and get every possible range of opinion: “he’s a baby killing tyrant that doesn’t care” to “he is nothing but pure cozy love!” These we will interrogate and find out their truth in the coming pages.
As presented in Scripture and creation, God is terrifying, yet a sweet comforter; a warrior King who crushes evil, and a perfect maternal figure who covers his children like a great bird; someone who will, once they’ve spoken, never go back on their word; a judge, a lawgiver, a guide, an artist of all passions and mediums, an engineer on both scales atomic and cosmic; perfect father, mother, Lord, savior. This section must feel weak, because written word is insufficient to capture such a personality. I say these things in no attempt to convince you of their truth, merely that this is the person the Scriptures attempt to convey the doings and sayings of.
The last thing I wish to note in this brief introduction to God is the following, Isaiah 6:2-3. Now, something to note about Hebrew, repetition indicates not 'severity' or 'exclamation,' but here is an example. When a Hebrew speaker says "pit pit", they mean the deepest, darkest pit they've ever come across; it is the most pit-like pit. English speaking children may jokingly say something like, "that's the duckiest duck to ever duck," speaking of a duck doing all the quintessential duck behaviors and quacking and the like. Only one of God's traits is repeated to the third, his holiness. Let’s call this idea a “plural of amplitude.”
"Above him were seraphim … And they were calling to one another: 'Holy, holy, holy is the Lord Almighty…"

	What exactly is holiness? I have something of a fear that this is partially like trying to differentiate blue and red to a blind man. Blue is simply blue and red is simply red, and unless you've experienced both you can't really grasp it. I can say all day long that blue light has more energy than red, that water is blue, that the sky is blue, that apples are red, but the blind man simply will not get a picture of red and blue in his head. He cannot. 
I, as I write this, feel like I at best have severe cataracts and can merely see hints of red and blue. It seems to me to be like this: I have heard people say they’ve spent “a lifetime” on something, and when I was younger this made no impression on me. But as I’ve gotten older, I can more sweepingly grasp the actual amount of time and effort this means was put into it, and yet I reckon I will not be able to fully understand it until I too have spent a lifetime with my arms bent to a task. So is holiness, in majority: the experience of it cannot be explained in written word, though its relevance can probably be sufficiently captured.
Jesus was called the Holy one of God, Israel was called to be holy. If you google holiness, you'll get plenty of articles describing it as being set apart from sin, righteous. But I reject such a definition, parroted from a superficial pondering. No character trait of God is defined by rebellion against him; that would be senseless and contradict his individual origin and oneness, his self-sufficiency. Holiness is something special, set apart, unique: but what does that mean? Holiness is directly related to who he is, and to fully answer that, we must know what God wants. By looking at what God wants, we will know him and his holiness far better. 
So, what does God want? For all the people I see trying to find an answer to this question,  it may come as a shock that he tells us in a pretty point-blank fashion. Colossians 1:16:
"For in him all things were created: things in heaven and on earth, visible and invisible, whether thrones or powers or rulers or authorities; all things have been created through him and for him." 

	Romans 11:36:
"For from him and through him and for him are all things. To him be the glory forever! Amen." 

John 8:50, Jesus speaking:
"I am not seeking glory for myself; but there is one who seeks it…" 

These verses, and many others, tell us that God created everything there is for his own glory. This fits with what we established through reason. He bases what is good off his own fundamental nature, so it makes sense that he would be acting in his own interest. What does that mean, though: "glory"? How does that fit in with a God that foundationally pursues order, creation, and community? When I think of God seeking "glory" as his primary goal, well, I think more of a conqueror chasing victory on the battlefield. That doesn't feel divine, does it? Honestly, this spawns more questions than it answers. The two that are the most important are: 
1.	Why does he want glory? 
2.	What is glory to God? 

The verses above leave this part a bit ambiguous, and to confuse matters more, God can manifest his glory in Scripture, generally as a fire or intense light of some kind. How on earth is "glory" even a physical thing? Why fire and light? Imagine if I showed you a painting of a lightning bolt, and you'd never seen one before in real life; you would be forgiven for thinking they were stationary, brilliant trees of some kind. It would never occur to you that they darted from sky to earth with a thunderclap and vanished faster than you can blink. So these descriptions of the fiery cloud and the like, while revealing in some fashion, don't answer the questions we're after, and can actually lead us down the wrong path (at first).
I spent a long while trying to figure out what his glory was, until I realized that I was going about this backwards. The better order to figuring this issue out, is to first find out why he wants this "glory" that can be manifested as a fire. That is where we will find our clues as to what it really is, this thing so precious that God would want it. 
Even so, during my search for why God would want it, I was under the influence of the human definition of glory, thinking of someone like Caesar, chasing glory on the battlefield, to the chanting and praise of his countrymen. That's the sort of thing we picture when we think of glory. And in no uncertain terms, that sort of glory is also the Lord's, but it is not the glory of the Lord. Isaiah 42:8 actually separates these two types of glory:
"I am the Lord; that is my name; my glory I give to no other, nor my praise to carved idols."

If you step back from the human idea of glory, you realize that Scripture isn't just telling us God wants glory; but that he deserves it, it's his. To elaborate on what I mean by deserve, take these facts:
1.	God is morally perfect, or has the maximum moral estimation (under his morality, which is the only one that matters when you’re omnipotent)
2.	God is maximally valuable (what could be worth more than God?)  

Since he sets the morality for the universe, he will rather obviously be the most morally perfect entity within it (see Special Article H). Further, he is God, and it should not be objectionable that he is the most valuable entity as well (this follows fairly easily from reason as he is both omnipotent and omniscient, creator and ruler of all; Philippians 3:8 somewhat points to this). 
It would be a lie and an imperfect judgement for God to not value himself appropriately, as in maximally,  and it would be unjust for him to not treat himself precisely as he deserves. After all, he claims he is perfectly just (Job 8:3, 9:19, 34:12, Psalm 50:6, 97:2, Romans 2:11, Psalm 7:11, among others). 
For scriptural sources of this 'deserving' idea, see here (1 Chronicles 16:28-29):
"…ascribe to the Lord glory and strength! Ascribe to the Lord the glory due his name; bring an offering and come before him! Worship the Lord in the splendor of holiness;" 

This also further separates God's glory from Caesar's: Caesar is fighting to earn his glory, God is seeing that he receives the glory he is owed. Also, our Caesar is selfishly seeking his, he does not wish to share it; God happily shares it with his community, including us, which I'll get to more in a minute. Another reason it is not selfish: God deserves this thing, and getting what you rightfully deserve is not selfish. 
The reason why he seeks it is that it is his rightful due, and to carry out his claimed perfect justice, he must receive what he is due. So we know the why, but not the what. What is glory? What could possibly be good enough for an omnipotent creator? If he values himself maximally, he merits a maximum reward. Said differently, he who is the best, deserves the best. Well, strangely enough, only one thing fits that essential criteria. Himself! Is God's glory himself, his own being?
God is unchanging (Malachi 3:6 etc.) and he's maximally powerful, or omnipotent. Therefore, we know:
1.	He must have already received in full what he deserves, as there is nothing that could prevent him from receiving it.
2.	It must have existed with him since the beginning of time, as he is unchanging.

 If he is unchanging and has always been satisfied, since at one point he was all there was (Revelation 22:13) then what he deserves must have been there with him: looking around the room, that just leaves himself. Psalm 26:8 (literal translation from Alec Motyer):
"O Lord, I love the [dwellingplace] of your house, the place of the abode of your glory."

A wrinkle, though: the Bible says God receives glory from his creations. We have verses like this, where Jesus says the following (John 17:10), among others: 
"And glory has come to me through them."

Isaiah 48:9-11:
"For my name's sake I defer my anger; for the sake of my praise I restrain it for you, that I may not cut you off. … For my own sake, for my own sake, I do it, for how should my name be profaned? My glory I will not give to another."

Isaiah 43:6-7:
"…bring my sons from afar and my daughters from the end of the earth, everyone who is called by my name, whom I created for my glory, whom I formed and made."

Isaiah 49:3:
"And he said to me, 'You are my servant, Israel, in whom I will be glorified.'" 

2 Timothy 4:18: 
"The Lord will rescue me from every evil deed and bring me safely into his heavenly kingdom. To him be the glory forever and ever. Amen."

Revelation 1:5-6:
"To him who loves us and has freed us from our sins by his blood and made us a kingdom, priests to his God and Father, to him be glory and dominion forever and ever. Amen."

Psalm 115:1:
"Not to us, O LORD, not to us, but to your name give glory, for the sake of your steadfast love and your faithfulness!"

You get the point. How do we reconcile the idea of God's self-sufficiency with these and other verses? Quite simply, actually. Genesis 1:27:
"So God created man in his own image, in the image of God he created him; male and female he created them."

See the Apostle Paul saying this in 2 Corinthians 3:18:
"And we all, with unveiled face, beholding the glory of the Lord, are being transformed into the same image from one degree of glory to another. For this comes from the Lord who is the Spirit." 

And again here in Philippians 1:10-11:
"so that you may approve what is excellent, and so be pure and blameless for the day of Christ, filled with the fruit of righteousness that comes through Jesus Christ, to the glory and praise of God."

And once more, in John 15:7-8:
" If you abide in me, and my words abide in you, ask whatever you wish, and it will be done for you. By this my Father is glorified, that you bear much fruit and so prove to be my disciples."

The following excerpts demonstrate that all the glory we have to give back to God, came from God. God isn't getting anything from us he didn't give us to begin with. He's seeing his own reflection, he's receiving back the gift he gave us. Psalm 22:23-25 tells us that the very praise we are commanded to give to the Lord, comes from him:
"You who fear the Lord, praise him! … From you comes my praise in the great congregation…"

See first Isaiah 6:2-3 for a clear scriptural reference to his glory being in creation:
"Above him stood the seraphim. … And one called to another and said: 'Holy, holy, holy is the LORD of hosts; the whole earth is full of his glory!'"

And 2 Thessalonians 1:10-12:
"when he comes on that day to be glorified in his saints, and to be marveled at among all who have believed, … To this end we always pray for you, that our God may make you worthy of his calling and may fulfill every resolve for good and every work of faith by his power, so that the name of our Lord Jesus may be glorified in you, and you in him …"

In that sense, God's glory is his self, and self-worth, and self-evaluation (Exodus 13:21 paired with Isaiah 4:5 also equates the Lord with his glory).  This is almost exactly what holiness is as well, and why God can be holy without an 'other'. To be clear, I don't think we can fully understand it. In its very essence, it is divine, and I think all we can do is describe it like one would, to re-use a metaphor, describe color to a blind man. He may academically understand color, but will never be able to fully comprehend or behold it. (We will behold him in his glory after our deaths, though.) Despite this limitation, we can still question the particulars, much like the blind man can ask if blue is cooler than red.
The first question this blind man asks is, "Why did God give us any of his glory only for it to be reflected back to him?" 
God does not need to have one objective. There's no reason he can't have multiple objectives. If he has given us some of himself in some form or fashion, then when he does something that benefits us, it still benefits him. I'm going to use his love of justice (Isaiah 61:8) as an example to clarify and expand that point. 1 Corinthians 8:6 tells us God is the source of all things:
"yet for us there is one God, the Father, from whom are all things and for whom we exist, and one Lord, Jesus Christ, through whom are all things and through whom we exist."

Therefore, when we act justly, or display justice, we are displaying something we got from God. He is still esteeming himself when he esteems a human displaying one of his traits. When he called David "a man after my heart," (Acts 13:22) he was praising himself, for he created David, he is the reason David could display devotion to God, and God was the very object of the praise and of David's devotion; God was worth devoting himself to. Another example would of course be Jesus, who will be eternally gloried because (in part, the part I am focusing on) he followed God's commands to the letter and followed their spirit perfectly (Philippians 2:5-11, among others).
Indeed, for Christians, the whole goal is to become more Christlike, which is more godly (Colossians 3, 2 Thessalonians 1:11-12, among others). So God can, and does, value us displaying his traits. But that doesn't answer the question, not fully. Why did he bother creating us at all? Why create anything? We exist, therefore there must have been a reason. Chew on that for a moment. If God gained literally nothing from making us, if he had no reason, he would not have done so. He could have just displayed his traits to his own community of three for all eternity, yet he didn't. Why? Certainly, there’s verses such as Psalm 28:9 that tell us we’re his inheritance:
“Oh do save your people, and bless your inheritance. Shepherd them, and carry them for ever.”

And Jeremiah 13:11 is quite theologically rich in this regard:
“For as the loincloth clings to the waist of a man, so I made the whole house of Israel and the whole house of Judah cling to me, declares the Lord, that they might be for me a people, a name, a praise, and a glory, but they would not listen.”

But 1 John 4:7-8 may have a stronger clue as to the chief reason for us:
"Beloved, let us love one another, for love is from God, and whoever loves has been born of God and knows God. Anyone who does not love does not know God, because God is love."

Pair that with 1 Corinthians 13:5:
"[Love] does not dishonor others, it is not self-seeking…"

If a characteristic of love is defined as not being self-seeking, then God must necessarily seek out an 'other' of some sort. The verses from 1 John tell us that God is indeed love, and is the source of love. He also lives this out by giving us the best gift possible: himself! What gift could possibly be worth more than God? (Psalm 16:11 hints at this but I have previously established the ultimate worth of God.) You see, if he denied his own maximum self-worth, he would then give us an inferior gift; something that was not himself. But as it is, we can experience the fullness of God precisely because he knows what he is worth, and gives us himself joyfully. 
Why does love matter? Love is a critical component of God, because he is a community unto himself. What holds a community together better than love? I don't mean that in a sappy Hollywood way: devotion to, and a desire to be close to, the other members of a community are the best way to preserve that community. So it makes sense that God, who professes to be a perfect community, would be no stranger to the ideal way to maintain one.
That brings us back to why God created anything at all. Let's get one thing straight: we know that God is pursuing something with the creation of our universe, otherwise, he wouldn't have made it. So, if the Christian God made the universe, he must gain something through it, or otherwise have a reason that advances his goal(s). That is not to say he is somehow not self-sufficient. But no one can deny that if God were totally and completely satisfied by himself, then the universe would not exist. Psalm 104:31:
"May the glory of the LORD endure forever; may the LORD rejoice in his works"

Clearly, he derives joy from his creations (when they are very good as in Genesis, that is). But I don't feel that we've arrived at the full answer for why he bothered to create anything just yet. Another facet of his nature inclines him to want creation to exist. He also didn't manifest it in his desired end state from the beginning, so he is willing to wait patiently and to receive what he wants from creation piecemeal.  (Of course, it also could be that creation had to go through multiple states in order for him to fully receive what he wanted, but we're getting there!) 
We should return to the manifestations of God's glory that we see in Scripture. Remember, it's always as a light or a fire. That actually gives us a fairly strong clue. Turn to these verses:
1 John 1:5:
"This is the message we have heard from him and proclaim to you, that God is light, and in him is no darkness at all."

Proverbs 4:18:
"But the path of the righteous is like the light of dawn, which shines brighter and brighter until full day."

Philippians 2:15:
"that you may be blameless and innocent, children of God without blemish in the midst of a crooked and twisted generation, among whom you shine as lights in the world,"

John 8:12:
"Again Jesus spoke to them, saying, 'I am the light of the world. Whoever follows me will not walk in darkness, but will have the light of life.'"

Matthew 5:14-16 is possibly the most obvious of these:
"You are the light of the world. A city set on a hill cannot be hidden. Nor do people light a lamp and put it under a basket, but on a stand, and it gives light to all in the house. In the same way, let your light shine before others, so that they may see your good works and give glory to your Father who is in heaven."

So the metaphor of darkness and light seems obvious to us… but why? Why is darkness associated with evil and light with good?  Well, what does light do? It radiates, it warms, it illuminates. Darkness is the opposite. In these verses, we see Scripture telling us that it is a fundamental part of God's nature to want to spread his traits, to shine, in a manner of speaking. There are many other verses, such as Isaiah 9:2, John 1:9, 1 Thessalonians 5:5… but these ones sufficiently capture the idea. The light we have received from God is indicative of its, and thus his, purpose. It is part of him to radiate. When I said that God would necessarily value creation in the first 'chapter', we see that in full form now. I didn't even have the Christian God in mind when I wrote that section, not consciously at least; it has merely fallen into place. He values the act of creation, and he literally pours himself into it. And to make the best creation possible, he had to put himself into it - literally.
The column of fire,  being God's glory, which is God, makes much more sense now. His spirit being a light over the waters of the great deep also makes more sense. God's holiness purifies, and his glory shines. 
So, he created the world in order that he might radiate his perfection in it, and glorify himself through it reflecting his glory back to him. He finds joy in creation, in himself. By doing something for us, he is really doing something for himself, even as we benefit. His love and light, perfectly expressed. 
The narrative does not end there, though. God’s chosen people are called his “inheritance” in Scripture, and as we know, human beings haven’t exactly sought to fulfill their true purpose, to reflect him as image bearers, with our whole selves often or ever. 
 
EVIL, SIN, AND GLORY

Another lynching. Madness grips the South.
A black man's hacked-off penis in his mouth,
His broken body torched. The terrorized
Blacks cower, and the whites are satanized.
His students ask, in Carver's Bible class:
Where is God now? What does He want from us?

Professor Carver smiles. "God is right here.
Don't lose contact with him. Don't yield to fear.
Fear is the root of hate, and hate destroys 
the hater. When Saul's army went to war
against the Philistines, the Israelites
lost contact, fearful of Goliath's might.

"When we lose contact, we see only hate,
only injustice, a giant so great
its shadow blocks our sun. But David slew
Goliath with the only things he knew"

-Excerpt from "Goliath" by Marilyn Nelson,  the theologically incorrect next stanzas left off; if Goliath is sin, his shade covering our head, fear creeping into our hearts… Scripture wants us to respond like David: he trusted that the Lord would do the right thing.

As I have gone through the glory narrative, I've ignored a wrinkle, or rather a canyon, that must be discussed. So, obviously, we sit in a world where we don't simply bask in the glory of the Lord, and do his will and draw closer to him all day.  We sin, and we do it a lot. Sin: how does it factor into the glory narrative? Is sin glorious? Why does God allow it? Why didn't God prevent evil in the first place? What is sin in the first place? The list of questions goes on and on. The critical question has been reformulated over and over throughout the millennia, and is a chief reason many people abandon or do not take up the faith (well, so they say anyway).
But I should not be too quick in assuming that everyone has the same idea of sin or evil as Scripture. Up first, then, is a brief overview of what exactly sin is to make sure we are using the same assumptions and working definition. Scripture simply defines sin in 1 John 3:4:
"Everyone who makes a practice of sinning also practices lawlessness; sin is lawlessness."

That is, sin is rebellion. It is refusing to do God's will. R.C. Sproul, a late popular theologian, called it "cosmic treason." This type of sin is fairly easy to grasp, but there is another, more contentious form of sin. See Psalm 51:5 for an introduction to original sin (the corruption caused by sin is often called iniquity in Scripture, more on that later):
"Behold, I was brought forth in iniquity, and in sin did my mother conceive me."

Original sin is a few things. The first I'll discuss is how it is a contamination of our very souls; it corrupts us from birth. To understand how we got infected by it, or rather how we infected ourselves with it, we have to go back to the Garden of Eden. The Garden was apparently a beautiful, harmonious place, and God put Adam and Eve in there to tend to it. They weren't mere working puppets, though, they were real thinking beings with independent wills, and God ordained that they would use them to make choices. One of the first choices Adam made was to name all the animals. (After all, what separates us from, say, a rock is chiefly that we have purposes and make choices.)
God gave these thinking, willed beings one command: "Don't eat from this specific tree." One tree, out of a forest of enticing trees, that was set apart. But, as the story goes, what did Adam and Eve do? They ate from that one tree. They used their God-given ability to make choices, to make a very poor one. That poor choice infected the world, and us, with what is called original sin. To see why, let's first look at Romans 5:12, with a sentiment echoed strongly in Isaiah 64:5-7:
" Therefore, just as sin came into the world through one man, and death through sin, and so death spread to all men because all sinned…"

Briefly, why death? Because God is a God of life, the owner and originator of all life, so life is his, and only his. That he gives it to us is not required, but a gift, and rebellion against him is a rebellion against life itself. Further, an omnipotent God has absolutely no reason to tolerate rebellion; it should burn up immediately in the face of his will. This means that he doubly has no reason to tolerate it, since it costs him nothing to remove it. This means that when we sin, we instantly deserve total destruction. 
Back to the first sin. Rebellion came to us through Adam and Eve, and the world was forever altered by their decision. Let’s not, though, allow Romans 5:12 to give us the wrong impression about “inheriting” that original sin, or what it is. My first impression of original sin was some black mark attaching it to my soul, and in my discussions with others, it seems that many forget we’re the product of those who ate the fruit of that tree. 
That tree was the tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil. (Quite the mouthful!) Adam and Eve realized they were naked   upon eating the fruit, so what did it do? It gave them an awareness, an ability to discern, that we had previously lacked; we had the ability to contemplate and make decisions about morality independent of God’s decrees. As Adam’s descendants, we have that awareness. You see, Psalm 119:73 and Leviticus 19:2-4  offers some insight. Mankind’s image bearing responsibility is to reflect God from a personal perspective. The law, or God’s commands in general, reflect his image from a morality-character-authority perspective. Our job is not to alter that perspective, for then we lie about who he is, and assume the Law’s job. (Paul has tons to say about this in Romans and Galatians.)
You may ask, "Sure, we have the awareness and loss of innocence from the garden, but how are we responsible for the choice made by a man and a woman some many millennia ago?" It makes little sense, so the argument goes, for us to be charged for the sin Adam committed that we did not. However, when we sin (not if, remember: Ephesians 2:3, Romans 3:23, among others, state that we have all sinned), we are thus charged the penalty of that inherited nature, and this is why: when we sin, we affirm the decision of Adam to eat the fruit. When we sin, we say "I'm glad Adam gave me the power to discern good and evil so I can go and do evil."
And because we affirm his decision, we are guilty of having done the exact same thing. In order for you and I to sin, Adam must have eaten from the tree. Since we willingly sin, we agree with his choice, we rely on it, and we affirm it. If someone breaks down a door and I go through, I affirm their decision to break down the door by making use of it, and I rely on it because I couldn't have gotten through otherwise.
Isaiah 65:1-7 has something to say on this matter, but I have an entire special article, L, on inherited guilt. It covers liability for the sins of others in general, but more to the point, it serves to clarify the limits on this idea of approval of sin meriting liability for it. Essentially, you do not inherit the guilt of another for their sins. (There is of course much Scripture cited there to defend that assertion in L.)
“I was ready to be sought by those who did not ask for me; I was ready to be found by those who did not seek me. I said, 'Here I am, here I am,' to a nation that was not called by my name. … a people who provoke me to my face continually, … These are a smoke in my nostrils, a fire that burns all the day. Behold, it is written before me: 'I will not keep silent, but I will repay; I will indeed repay into their lap both your iniquities and your fathers' iniquities together, says the LORD; because they made offerings on the mountains and insulted me on the hills, I will measure into their lap payment for their former deeds.'” 

The quoted section details that God is always ready to forgive, but as successive generations fail to break from their sinful past, and learn from and follow suit of their forebears, they have made the sins of their parents’ their own, so they make the punishments of their parents’ their own as well. Accepting, willing receipt of sin entails accepting, willing receipt of punishment.
Original sin is thus two things. It is the altered perception  as a result of eating the fruit, and then it is the approving guilt of Adam's enabling rebellion.  Again, it is not inherited guilt. It might be accepted guilt in any number of cases, but it is not unwilling acceptance.
But there's also another more curious effect of 'original sin.' Again, God is the source of everything that is good. That means anything like mercy, or justice, or kindness, or love: those are all the sole right and item of God. When we rebelled against God, we lost the right to have any of him in us or around us. 
So from the moment you are born, you are cut off from God's goodness. This makes some experiential sense to anyone who has raised a child; who ever had to teach a toddler to be selfish, to be angry, to lie? As Voddie Baucham humorously puts it, "That's not a little angel, it's a viper in a diaper." Jokes aside, people in their current natural state would be able to express exactly zero of God's good qualities, since we have lost the right to them.  This is the final component of original sin: we don't have the right to be good.  Our sins, our evil and barbarity, hopelessness, anxiety, pain, anger: are all we deserve, all we can claim, because we have rejected God.  
With sin described, and how we came to be sinful also described… what often happens is people nod when I say all that, then the immediate reply is "well, that seems an awful lot like God's fault." To elaborate: "Why did God make such defective creatures that rebelled basically instantly? Why didn't he delete us and start over? Actually, why didn't he just make us better in the first place?" The answer to these questions will be the bulk of this chapter. Let’s start with this: if God is omniscient, then he very well knew what was going to happen. It must, therefore, be the case that our rebellion aided God's goals (or had no effect on them). More specifically, his goal is his glory, he knew about our rebellion, and did things this way anyway: ergo, our rebellion must have enhanced his glory in some way. It’s also possible that our rebellion was an unavoidable side effect of his true purpose, a possibility we will explore further down. Of course, our rebellion can’t get in the way of an omnipotent God’s ability to execute his designs.  Moreso this: if he wanted a people to share himself with for his glory, why did he do it this way, a way that allowed for evil to exist? 
How can we even evaluate an answer to these questions? As I’ve stated, I’m looking for character inconsistencies or contradictions in the Lord’s actions, so that will be part of it. I'm looking to see if, in his handling of evil, God violates his character or goals. Simple enough, God is his own metric. Is this circular? "Of course God would define his solution as perfect," you might say, but that is not the intention here. He’s told us who he is, and shown us what he’s done: is he trustworthy? Is he contradictory, and thus probably a human invention? 
Enough contextual preamble. I do have to attack this problem from many angles, so bear with me. The first is figuring out whether wrath is glorious and whether God’s perfect justice and perfect mercy are contradictory. In so doing we will explore God’s chosen solution to the sin problem: Christ. This will not resolve all the questions about Adam and Eve outright, so more will follow. But let’s start with wrath: if God's very self is glory, then all of his traits must be glorious, and that includes his wrath. Romans 9:22-23:
"What if God, desiring to show his wrath and to make known his power, has endured with much patience vessels of wrath prepared for destruction, in order to make known the riches of his glory for vessels of mercy, which he has prepared beforehand for glory…"

Ezekiel 28:22:
"…Thus says the Lord GOD: 'Behold, I am against you, O Sidon, and I will manifest my glory in your midst. And they shall know that I am the LORD when I execute judgments in her and manifest my holiness in her;"

These two sections from Scripture show us that a trait we typically would not think of as 'glorious' in fact is, and that also God has specifically taken action in the past to glorify himself in his wrath. Pointedly, I hear this far, far too much: “I do tend to prefer Christians who emphasize the ‘loving’ side of the faith.” I want to deal with this sentiment as well; my thesis is that God’s wrath is to our benefit. I’ll explain how as I go along.
Much has been made of Romans 9:22-23 that we'll get to towards the end of this chapter, but suffice it to say that those who are not saved will still glorify God by bearing his wrath for their rebellion. Further, in the verse from Ezekiel above, we saw God specifically acting to stamp out rebellion and display his wrath for his glory's sake. Take a look a few verses later at Ezekiel 28:26 too:
"They [Israel] shall dwell securely, when I execute judgments upon all their neighbors who have treated them with contempt. Then they will know that I am the LORD their God."

The Israelites were protected by God's wrath, and shown mercy for their own failings. We see this pattern of wrath for the rebel and mercy for the remnant  all throughout Scripture.  In the following verse, the prophet Isaiah relays God's words, and pairs wrath with patience again, like the Romans excerpt. Isaiah 48:8-11:
"…For I knew that you would surely deal treacherously, and that from before birth you were called a rebel. 'For my name's sake I defer my anger; for the sake of my praise I restrain it for you, that I may not cut you off. Behold, I have refined you, but not as silver; I have tried you in the furnace of affliction. For my own sake, for my own sake, I do it, for how should my name be profaned? My glory I will not give to another."

As you see, God's patience with us is for his glory too. Sure, that’s easy enough to accept with Scripture backing it up: wrath is glorious, and God delays his wrath patiently. A new question appears: “Are we playthings to be massacred for his glory, waiting in cells for the right time because he's patient with who and when?” We’re just getting started; I haven't tackled why God make Adam and Eve exactly as he did, or how that decision maximized his glory and was without contradiction. There is yet more work to be done.
More questions come: What about mercy? Is mercy not at odds with justice (the justification of wrath)? That sounds a lot like a contradiction: how can we say that God is perfectly just and also perfectly merciful simultaneously? Here's a couple verses that mention his mercy:
Psalm 25:11:
"For your name's sake, O LORD, pardon my guilt, for it is great."

Psalm 79:9:
"Help us, O God of our salvation, for the glory of your name; deliver us, and atone for our sins, for your name's sake!"

Psalm 130:
“Out of the depths I cry to you, O LORD! O Lord, hear my voice! Let your ears be attentive to the voice of my pleas for mercy! If you, O LORD, should mark iniquities, O Lord, who could stand? But with you there is forgiveness, that you may be feared. … O Israel, hope in the LORD! For with the LORD there is steadfast love, and with him is plentiful redemption. And he will redeem Israel from all their iniquities.”

If God wants to glory in both mercy and justice fully, two options come to mind after a little thought: One, God could just make wrath and mercy available to all, and some will naturally fall into either camp,    so both get to be displayed. Or two, at times he maximizes his justice, and at times he maximizes his mercy, so in the end, both have been satisfied. Both of these are worse than what Scripture tells us he’s done. 
Christ was/is  God’s solution. So we're all on the same page with perhaps not this exact wording but the core ideas behind it, here's the gospel in an overly dry and specific run-on sentence: The gospel is the good news that God, in his sovereign grace, chose to save sinners by sending his Son, Jesus Christ, to live a perfect life, to die on a cross to save his people, and drink the cup of his wrath on our behalf so that we could be redeemed and reunited with God, to the glory of the Father. 
In other words, in the offer of Christ, we find maximum mercy: Scripture tells us that salvation is a gift, a full pardon from endless punishment in hell. The gift, as well, is the indwelling Holy Spirit, Christ as head priest, Lord, and savior, and the Father as our head of household. Thus, the gift itself is also maximal: it is God. So through Christ we were spared the max, and undeservedly given the max. 
	In Christ, God actually satisfies his justice and mercy together. Christ bore God's wrath, fulfilling it. He also opens the way to God's mercy, fulfilling that as well. He bore the brunt of God's wrath and then he freely offered his mercy to us. The following three quotes defend this idea. I am going to start with Philippians 2:5-11, which shows that Christ is indeed for God's glory (NIV quote):
"…have the same mindset as Christ Jesus: Who, being in very nature God, did not consider equality with God something to be used to his own advantage; rather, he made himself nothing by taking the very nature of a servant, being made in human likeness … he humbled himself by becoming obedient to death— even death on a cross! Therefore God exalted him to the highest place and gave him the name that is above every name … and every tongue acknowledge that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father."

Ephesians 1:13-14 (NIV):
"And you also were included in Christ when you heard the message of truth, the gospel of your salvation. When you believed, you were marked in him with a seal, the promised Holy Spirit, who is a deposit guaranteeing our inheritance until the redemption of those who are God's possession—to the praise of his glory."

John 13:31-32:
"When [Judas] had gone out, Jesus said, 'Now the Son of Man is glorified and God is glorified in him. If God is glorified in him, God will glorify the Son in himself, and will glorify him at once. …"

From drinking the cup of wrath to our full salvation, all of it was for God’s glory. So, God knew what he was going to do about sin in advance, and that chosen solution was Christ. The Old Testament is littered with verses that show this. God knew it was the solution from even the time of Adam and Eve's sin, and the prophets foretold of it. (Genesis 3:15, Isaiah 53:5, Psalm 2:14–18, Zechariah 12:10, among others. I will discuss salvation in the Old Testament in a few pages, and prophecy later on in more detail.) So we know that it was not some slapdash thing he cooked up after man fell; God decided in advance that when man sinned, he would give up Christ to his wrath, part of his own self, in order to bring us back. 
Let's see some excerpts from Scripture that discuss the Christ solution and I'll expand the argument. First is an excerpt from Romans 5 (NIV):
"Nor can the gift of God be compared with the result of one man's sin: The judgment followed one sin and brought condemnation, but the gift followed many trespasses and brought justification. For if, by the trespass of the one man, death reigned through that one man, how much more will those who receive God's abundant provision of grace and of the gift of righteousness reign in life through the one man, Jesus Christ! 
Consequently, just as one trespass resulted in condemnation for all people, so also one righteous act resulted in justification and life for all people. For just as through the disobedience of the one man the many were made sinners, so also through the obedience of the one man the many will be made righteous."

Two key points: One man caused all this, and one man fixed it. No more was required to undo it. However, the reply comes: "Why did God need to use one man? Why not zero?" More or less, humans screwed up, so humans needed to pay for our sins. I already talked a bit about God's proclaimed perfect justice; he wouldn't not punish our sin, which is what the 'zero-man' solution argues for in essence. What's he going to punish instead? A stick? Obvious nonsense. "A judgement vessel or doll made specifically to take his wrath!" What do you think the human Christ is, o nay-sayer? No. Human sin, human punishment. An individual caused all these problems, and an individual solved them. 
Second, the indwelling of God, the family association with God, the gift of God from God to us outweighs the fallenness of the world, so much so that the two can't be compared. Here's an excerpt from Romans 6 concerning Christ that promises that gift, using the surety of Christ's rise (NIV):
"Or don't you know that all of us who were baptized into Christ Jesus were baptized into his death? We were therefore buried with him through baptism into death in order that, just as Christ was raised from the dead through the glory of the Father, we too may live a new life.
For if we have been united with him in a death like his, we will certainly also be united with him in a resurrection like his. For we know that our old self was crucified with him so that the body ruled by sin might be done away with, that we should no longer be slaves to sin— because anyone who has died has been set free from sin.
Now if we died with Christ, we believe that we will also live with him. For we know that since Christ was raised from the dead, he cannot die again; death no longer has mastery over him. The death he died, he died to sin once for all; but the life he lives, he lives to God."

That excerpt shows us in detail that we will be freed, completely, from the scourge of evil and sin. More or less this excerpt confirms what I had said: Christ is a solution to the problem of sin. 2nd Corinthians 5:17 offers this additional insight into this:
"Therefore, if anyone is in Christ, he is a new creation. The old has passed away; behold, the new has come."

This next one is Romans 5, it defends that Christ brought peace between us rebels and God, and this showed his love for us:
"Therefore, since we have been justified through faith, we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ, through whom we have gained access by faith into this grace in which we now stand. And hope does not put us to shame, because God's love has been poured out into our hearts through the Holy Spirit, who has been given to us.
You see, at just the right time, when we were still powerless, Christ died for the ungodly. … But God demonstrates his own love for us in this: While we were still sinners, Christ died for us.
Since we have now been justified by his blood, how much more shall we be saved from God's wrath through him! For if, while we were God's enemies, we were reconciled to him through the death of his Son, how much more, having been reconciled, shall we be saved through his life!"

There we see that we have been redeemed and reconciled by Christ's sacrifice. In Scripture, Christ often talked about having been here for peace; but not peace between men (or not only that), but peace between humanity and God. The indemnity between us and him was cosmic and maximal. Christ took it away (for those of his flock). The offer of salvation by grace through faith alone is the most merciful act of Scripture, those who deserve the least are given the most, and so to reiterate, we see God's mercy and love maximized through this act.
Also in these verses is the notion that only someone who was blameless could possibly stand before God's wrath for us. It is an object of, and fulfillment of, God's perfect mercy and love that he allowed someone to stand in for us. That person had to be perfect, otherwise they could not pay for our sins, since no one can pay for their own sins and then someone else's: the penalty for any sin is death. You can only die once. 1 Peter 2:24 says:
"He himself bore our sins in his body on the tree, that we might die to sin and live to righteousness. By his wounds you have been healed."

1 John 2:2:
"He is the propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only but also for the sins of the whole world."

He bore the wrath intended for everyone (well, everyone who does not wind up in Hell, but we're getting there). Verses such as 1 John 3:2  and Romans 8:30  additionally show us the comprehensiveness of the Christ solution, and how it resolved the root causes of sin instead of being a mere salve. Our human, sinful nature will be abandoned, our wills conformed to that of God only when we transition from sinner and saint to just saint. 
In sum, there is ample Scriptural evidence that through Christ, not only was the penalty for sin paid, satisfying God's perfect justice, but God's perfect mercy, or grace, was satisfied as well: we are all offered forgiveness. Further, Christ's resurrection, and our belief in it, brings the Holy Spirit into us, and we can therefore be conformed to the image of God anew. We were created to and did for a while live with God, but chose to disobey him. Now, the penalty for that disobedience has been paid, and with the indwelling Holy Spirit, we can live with God again, and we'll have chosen to, and want to. We can be the creation that chooses not to eat the fruit. By being made dead to sin, we are no longer married to it, slaves to it. By all of that, we can reasonably conclude that Christ is an effective, non-contradictory solution to the problem of sin. 
"Sure. But how exactly is that more efficient, or better, than just starting with creatures that wouldn't sin? Sure Christ satisfies God's justice and mercy and all that, but it doesn't feel better than the alternative of there being no sin in the first place." One thing I wish to note is that there is no need to discuss alternative solutions to the problem of sin; Christ fulfilled God’s objectives perfectly and maximally – that means you can only ever equal the Christ solution, not exceed it. I will reiterate so we don’t get lost or forget: by God’s standard. That’s the one we’re checking this by. 
"Okay, fine, but I still don't understand why didn't God just make us with his Holy Spirit and all to begin with? Even if I grant that this is all neat and tidy, why not start there? It was within God's power. Surely he values the minimization of evil as well as the maximization of his glory."
 Just about here is where you often start hearing about the phrase “free will.” I’m not about to repeat that tired and a-Scriptural claim that God valued free will more than preventing sin or bla bla bla, whatever variation you’ve heard. Yet, clearly, God created a being with the capacity to disagree with him, to ignore him. God desires community, not a prison. Community goes both ways. Relationships go both ways. We find this all over Scripture, yes? God makes covenants with men. He made one in the garden, he made one with Noah, he made one with Abraham, he made one with Moses, he made one with David, and we have the New Covenant with Christ. Adam failed the test, God prevented total destruction with Noah, promised redemption through Abraham, established Israel through Moses, promised a perfect king with David, and fulfilled all of it in Christ. And each time, the human beings involved screwed it up. That is important. Keep that in your head. God made these covenants with us, and time and time again we could not and did not keep up our end. I am, of course, suggesting that human beings inevitably disobey. “So why did he make humans or creatures that would inevitably disobey? How is it not his fault?”
The discussion has moved on, so a brief recap: wrath is glorious (part of God’s character), justice and mercy can be fulfilled in a non-contradictory manner through Christ, who perfectly solves sin by God’s metrics, and God is patient with us. Now, keeping the community aspect of God in mind, I’ll tackle the inevitable disobedience of not only humans, but any creature with a distinct will from God’s. This will be in service of answering the remaining questions about the existence of evil.
Imagine some entity A, and some entity B. We can see plainly that if A and B have distinct wills, then they are not the same will, and there must be some difference. Thus, A and B will disagree at some point. Romans 7 says as much: the moment the law was shown to us, we sinned, because we are by nature rebellious. You may wish to read verses 7-14, but here's verse 7:8:
"For apart from the law, sin lies dead."

What are we to make of this? Paul is discussing in Romans 7, in part, whether God's law is evil or not ("what then shall we say? That the law is sin?"). God's commands, while good on their own, only reveal the sin that was already within us (hence, sin lies dead until the law reveals it and it springs into action). Might then God, in the Garden of Eden, have been doing the same thing? I’ll come back to that, but I need to fully defend, from a Scriptural perspective, this idea that any being with a separate will, will inevitably disobey. 
Let's see God's demonstrations of the problem in Exodus and Ezekiel. The Exodus, which in a lot of ways can be seen as a metaphor for humanity (despite it also being a literal event), can be summarized like this:
1.	The Israelites wound up as slaves of the Egyptians, in a fallen state.
2.	They lived in these conditions until Moses, an image of the savior to come, arose and rescued them from Pharaoh, who had oppressed them.
3.	They left the fallen lands through the 'Sea of Reeds,' which is symbolic of baptism.
4.	When they were nearing the Promised Land after a long time in the desert, the people grumbled, and Moses disobeyed God in a display of pride. He failed to complete the journey as a result, and failed to lead the people into the Promised Land. (This was God showing us that something greater was needed to finish the journey to the Promised Land.)
The metaphor ends there, but you see the connection. Setting aside Moses' failure, we see that Moses is a stand-in for Christ, the Promised Land stands for heaven, and Egypt symbolizes the prison of sin or simply 'the world.' But what is my point in detailing all of that? Look first at Numbers 12:3 (NIV):
"Now Moses was a very humble man, more humble than anyone else on the face of the earth."

Moses is the author of Numbers, and he said what he said in 12:3 with much the same sentiment as when Christ said this:
"Do you think I cannot call on my Father, and he will at once put at my disposal more than twelve legions of angels?"

Neither statement is prideful bragging: Moses is telling us that he was the most humble human, and Christ is telling us the scope of his value just as factually. Similarly, both had a reason to tell us these facts. I would like to focus on Moses'. Moses is saying, "nothing recorded in this work or others I write is for my own aggrandizement but the Lord's glory.” He was telling us that he had suppressed his will as much as could be done, and had the proper perspective on his relative worth to the Lord’s as much as could be done.  So, if there was ever a being with its own will, yet without Jesus, to be able to keep God's commands and not let his own pride get in the way and fall like Adam did, it would be Moses. So if all it took was full humility, then it could be done. Yet he failed.
There was something else that was (nearly) unique about Moses: his radiant face. See here in Exodus 34:30-35 (NIV):
"When Aaron and all the Israelites saw Moses, his face was radiant, and they were afraid to come near him. … But whenever he entered the Lord's presence to speak with him, he removed the veil until he came out. And when he came out and told the Israelites what he had been commanded, they saw that his face was radiant."

You see, Moses was as full of the Glory of the Lord as any man ever was, such that his face shone. I probably needn't remind you that he was the conduit by which God struck Egypt with the plagues.  So if we look at Moses, we see in him a man who:
1.	Was the most humble person - ever 
2.	Already had a very high amount of divine presence within him

But as I noted in point four, Moses winds up acting very unhumble. In Numbers 20:10 (NIV):
"He and Aaron gathered the assembly together in front of the rock and Moses said to them, 'Listen, you rebels, must we bring you water out of this rock?'"

Moses says we, not 'the Lord.' For context, Moses was angry with the Israelites for their complaining, and was giving them a lecture. He isn't saying this happily, he's mad, and the next thing he did was strike the rock to bring forth water. This is important, because God had told him to speak to the rock. But he hits it, twice, and that combined with the 'we' is enough for God: Moses is ascribing the production of the water to himself, not God. This was a shocking departure from his usual character of obedience and humility. This makes my point; the presence of the Lord within and a totally humble character are not enough; Moses’ will was separate from God’s, and so it disagreed at some point.
There is another being I want to talk about, though, that also fell from a position of immense honor. The high angel Lucifer. Let's look at Ezekiel 28 for information about Lucifer (NIV):
"This is what the Sovereign Lord says: 'You were the seal of perfection, full of wisdom and perfect in beauty. You were in Eden, the garden of God … You were anointed as a guardian cherub, for so I ordained you. You were on the holy mount of God; you walked among the fiery stones. You were blameless in your ways from the day you were created till wickedness was found in you. Through your widespread trade you were filled with violence, and you sinned. So I drove you in disgrace from the mount of God, and I expelled you, guardian cherub, from among the fiery stones. Your heart became proud on account of your beauty, and you corrupted your wisdom because of your splendor. So I threw you to the earth …" 

I have cut out parts of the description, but from what's left here we see that Satan was an important being. He was made perfect. He was given wisdom and beauty. He had power, and was with God, perhaps directly in his presence like the seraphim of Isaiah's vision. Isaiah 14:13 may imply he wanted to glorify himself above God, but that section as a whole could merely be mocking the real human kings of Babylon who thought they were set on going to the heavens, and not intending to reference Satan. However, Isaiah's messages reach past current events to timeless truths, and what is true of the king of Assyria or Babylon or Egypt or England or even Satan… is true of all.
But more importantly, Satan is given to us as an example of a creature made perfect, by any metric (albeit lower than God). Be it authority, power, wisdom, strength, beauty… he had it all. And he grew prideful, and betrayed God. Just like Moses, who had none of those things; and he grew prideful too. 
The argument being drawn here is that Scripture says that there could be no being that would have lacked the capacity to disobey - pay attention to that phrase, I am being very specific in my phrasing - in the Garden of Eden, or anywhere really, eventually. It doesn't matter, then, in what form we cast a hypothetical being with an individuated will to put in the Garden of Eden. It will never be humbler than Moses. And he struck the rock. It will never have more honor or splendor than Satan, and he took a third of the angels with him. 
So, when I wrote the above, I hadn't yet completed my study of Isaiah.  Imagine my surprise, then, when I find God making the very same argument in Isaiah! Look to Chapter 5:
"My beloved had a vineyard on a very fertile hill. He dug it and cleared it of stones, and planted it with choice vines; he built a watchtower in the midst of it, and hewed out a wine vat in it; and he looked for it to yield grapes, but it yielded wild grapes. And now, O inhabitants of Jerusalem and men of Judah,
judge between me and my vineyard. What more was there to do for my vineyard, that I have not done in it? When I looked for it to yield grapes, why did it yield wild grapes? … For the vineyard of the Lord of hosts is the house of Israel, and the men of Judah are his pleasant planting;"

He says the same thing as me plain as day: there was nothing else to be done for the proverbial vineyard, and yet it still produced failure, and who was to blame? We see then that any creature given its own will, will inevitably disobey. The affairs of the human world alone, of all creation, fall out of order; the stars didn't muck about, plants were doing their thing, animals, fungi, insects, everything except us was quite orderly. But there's a challenge, that brings us to the next section. To recap, I’ve argued that wrath is glorious, Christ solves sin perfectly and fulfills God’s justice and mercy perfectly. Then I argued that any being with an independent will, must necessarily disagree with God’s will. The challenge is this: "Sure, but your argument seems to imply it's impossible at all. Clearly, through your Christ, it is not. So what's the difference, and why didn't God do it that way at the outset?" 
Let's consider God's nature: when he describes himself in Scripture, it is very often as a light; and what does light do? It radiates, it warms, it illuminates. In other words, it shares itself. So what did God want to do with us?
He wanted to follow that nature; to share his glory and self. Indeed, in Scripture, we see a constant narrative of God running after us despite us running away from him. He follows us all the way from Adam to you and me, with many, many, many misfits and miscreants in-between. He loves us, but does not coerce love in response: he gives us a choice.  I said it once I’ll say it again: Scripture brooks no argument of free will, I make an argument of independent will. Further, I don’t think God’s sovereignty should be sidelined in favor of some precious will of ours. The apparent contradiction of responsibility and sovereignty is discussed later on.
1 John 5:3: "In fact, this is love for God: to keep his commands."

Programming that follows its instructions has no "love." Thus, loving God requires choosing to do so, and given the verse, that means choosing to have trust him. At the restoration of Eden, we see this, Revelation 22:17:
"The Spirit and the bride say, "Come!" And let the one who hears say, "Come!" Let the one who is thirsty come; and let the one who wishes take the free gift of the water of life."

But one verse does not fully explain this. As I've stated, all of creation was made to point to its creator. We know this obviously since creation is for his glory, so it thus must typify him who made it. An exemplar is marriage. Marriage is a creation-example of the relationship God has with his people. In the prototypical perfect marriage, we find two people that chose one another, loving each other self-sacrificially till the end of their days, each carrying out their ordained role and loving one another with full joy.  
Jeremiah 10:16:
"Not like these is he who is the portion of Jacob, for he is the one who formed all things, and Israel is the tribe of his inheritance; the LORD of hosts is his name."

God's use of Jacob instead of Israel is not accidental here; Jacob was a sinful, rebellious man. God saying that Israel was his inheritance (from creation), defends my argument as well. No part of this relationship, in fact, is accidental in design, and so I find in this an example of why God has set it up it so that we have a choice  in the matter of who we marry. So in the garden, he had to give us a command, or else we couldn't willingly love him (by his own definition). Love is a choice, remember, and a choice requires an independent will (subtly different from a "free" will; nobody has a free will, for we are at the very least constrained by physics, memory, and God’s sovereignty; and I'd rather not spend three pages bickering about what exactly "free" means). There are three components to a bona fide independent will:
1.	Choices to make. Without choices to make, an independent will is, in practical terms, meaningless and unverifiable.
2.	Awareness of the choice and belief in the idea that choosing is possible. If you don't know there are choices, or have no faith that you can actually make choices, then you do not have an independent will.
3.	Consequences of choice. If your choices do not have consequences, have you actually made any choices? (I am using the word 'consequences' in its neutral form, meaning generic cause and effect.) 

Using these components, what we see in the Garden of Eden immediately makes more sense. God wanted us to have a choice to love him or not (not for us, but for his glory and for his community), and love for him is following his commands. So he gave us a command: a single one about not eating from a tree (which was really a warning about trust – more on this in a moment). And then, he allowed the serpent to inform us that it was possible to distrust, and of course disobey, God. The serpent satisfies #2 above. And then, of course, the result of Adam's choice obviously fulfills #3. Why do I bother going through that? Because I want it to be clear: God did not do this. We did. Adam did. Eve did.
For those of you who see that logic and go, "That's very human centric. Didn't you warn us that Scripture is always God focused?" Very sharp of you! That is correct. Similarly, if you watch John MacArthur's video sermon entitled "John MacArthur: Why Does God Allow So Much Suffering and Evil?" you're going to find him saying something, after 45 minutes (seriously, skip to minute 45 if you watch the video, you'll have missed nothing), about this. He says something like "The sovereign God cares about man's free will? Really?"
So let's think about this: Scripture can be looked at as a series of covenants between man and God,  and so one can rightly see the situation in Genesis as the very first covenant between man and God. In order to make a covenant, one needs something to be agreed upon. Said another way, both parties make promises, both parties must be aware of their own and the other's promises, and consequences for violating or keeping the covenant (and dual awareness of those consequences). From this covenant perspective, we see the exact same criteria as I gave above. God is relational. He is communal. He values that, as one of his traits (three persons in one). Like I said with marriage, it points back to him. It in no way invalidates his sovereignty, or makes it not the focus. God is on his throne, God was on the cross, and God washed the feet of his disciples. God is all of those things. He can be the perfect servant and he can be the perfect sovereign.  
Let’s see again the trees God chose to name in the Garden, and return to my thought that “Was God revealing the sin inherent within us by the trees in the Garden?” from a few pages back. That first tree also did something else, see Romans 3:20:
"For by works of the law no human being will be justified in his sight, since through the law comes knowledge of sin."

By it, God showed us what was right and what was wrong. Trusting him was right, disobeying him was wrong; choosing our own understanding over his was wrong. This is only a couple sentences in this book, but I must say that it is a very important point. God showed us the danger of not following him with this tree. Again, very important, and something I hope you remember about this tree. It was Satan that took that warning and twisted it into sin for our destruction. Of course, I answered why Satan was in the garden a few paragraphs back (part of the checks for an individual will). 
The Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil was, of course, the symbol of the test. (This is the only way in which these trees are metaphorical, is their existence as physical stand-ins for the Adamic covenant.) For Scriptural confirmation of such, see again in Revelation 22 (which re-confirms what I said about all of goodness being God’s right to give, and those who forsake him losing right to it):
"'Behold, I am coming soon, bringing my recompense with me, to repay each one for what he has done. I am the Alpha and the Omega, the first and the last, the beginning and the end. Blessed are those who wash their robes, so that they may have the right to the tree of life and that they may enter the city by the gates. Outside are the dogs and sorcerers and the sexually immoral and murderers and idolaters, and everyone who loves and practices falsehood."

Revelation 2:7 says the same thing. If Adam obeyed, if Adam passed the test offered by the first tree, the second, the Tree of Life, stood as a symbol of the promises of the covenant between him and God.  Now, who do you suppose is the Tree of Life? Maybe an odd question to hear for the first time. But if you've ever opened a Bible you can probably guess: Christ, of course. 
When we look at what happened in Eden, we say "Look at what suffering and pain was caused!" This is where the blame-game starts, in my experience, which I find immensely ironic, considering that is precisely what Adam and Eve did. Look at this (from Genesis 3): 
The man said, 'The woman you put here with me—she gave me some fruit from the tree, and I ate it.' The woman said, 'The serpent deceived me, and I ate.'"

I have argued with so many people who blame God for Eden, and it would be funny were it not so tragic. Adam blamed the woman and God in the first words of his statement. Eve blamed the serpent in the first words of hers. They blame absolutely everyone but themselves, and people continue on in that fashion, even today: blaming God in the first words off their tongues. There's no blaming it on God. The tree was in the center of the garden: no randomly happening upon it and eating it. The command was clear: no misinterpreting it. The garden was filled with trees that had tasty fruit, not like it was the only water in the desert. What excuse is there? As much as they want to blame God for giving us the choice, he really made it easy to not disobey.
So we come to it: Scripture says God is sovereign and also that man is responsible for his evil.  Isaiah 3:13-15: 
"The LORD has taken his place to contend; he stands to judge peoples. The LORD will enter into judgment with the elders and princes of his people: 'It is you who have devoured the vineyard, the spoil of the poor is in your houses. What do you mean by crushing my people, by grinding the face of the poor?' declares the Lord GOD of hosts."

Scripture seems to take the view that for any good to occur, God must act (which makes sense), and for evil to occur, God need do nothing at all (with regard to human action).  Philippians 2:12-13 confirms this for us:
"Therefore, my beloved, as you have always obeyed, so now, not only as in my presence but much more in my absence, work out your own salvation with fear and trembling, for it is God who works in you, both to will and to work for his good pleasure."

I mean that's the whole point of what I argued above about the inevitability of disobedience, yeah? But I don’t want to lose my way, here: the chief question at hand is “Why didn’t God shackle us at the beginning” and “does God care about our will?” I’m walking you briefly through covenantal theology to make a few points in regards to these questions. I'm going to drop this section from Galatians in here, Galatians 3:15-22:
"To give a human example, brothers: even with a man-made covenant, no one annuls it or adds to it once it has been ratified. Now the promises were made to Abraham and to his offspring. It does not say, 'And to offsprings,' referring to many, but referring to one, 'And to your offspring,' who is Christ. This is what I mean: the law, which came 430 years afterward, does not annul a covenant previously ratified by God, so as to make the promise void. For if the inheritance comes by the law, it no longer comes by promise; but God gave it to Abraham by a promise. Why then the law? It was added because of transgressions, until the offspring should come to whom the promise had been made, and it was put in place through angels by an intermediary. Now an intermediary implies more than one, but God is one. Is the law then contrary to the promises of God? Certainly not! For if a law had been given that could give life, then righteousness would indeed be by the law. But the Scripture imprisoned everything under sin, so that the promise by faith in Jesus Christ might be given to those who believe."

There's so much of theological importance in that section that you could write a whole book about it probably, but I want to draw out a few things. God, speaking through Paul, declares that commands themselves cannot produce life; this is his answer to the objection: "Why didn't God shackle us so we couldn't sin?" Adam had one freaking command and got it wrong.  The thing is, though, with these covenants, there's two sides every time, yes? God always wants us to participate. He values our participation, he wants us to want to be involved, and to work with him. God wanted us to choose to love him because it meant sharing in his glory and having eternal life and joy. But also from the Galatians excerpt: given that God seems to have arrived at the conclusion that any being with an individuated will inevitably disobeys, he decided that he must make a covenant with himself, and take up both sides of it on his own (graciously). We, then, get to partake of the fruit of that covenant by being washed by Christ's blood and relying on his righteousness, through faith in God. Through trusting God and being obedient, both of which Adam failed to do but Christ succeeded at.
Now, the next question had to do with being “human-centric.” Here, see this, Psalm 119:58 (Motyer-modified ESV):
“I entreat your favor with all my heart; be gracious to me according to your word.”

If you render that first part literally, it says “I have mollified/softened your face” – this is quite the daring expression, to say that we predisposed God to favor us; but the next part corrects any misinterpretation by the immediate reference to grace. The dynamic of prayer reveals how sovereignty and responsibility interact: he ordained certain graces to be dispensed by prayer, much how he ordained the choice of faith to be made properly by those who he wrote in the book of life. 
I haven’t bonded these two questions, “Is that human-centric” and “why didn’t he shackle us?” haphazardly. In the Psalms, and other books of course, but in the Psalms there are many references to God’s distaste for empty ritualism. Often it is spoken that God has no love for sacrifices and burnt offerings given without proper heart intention. Yes I am about to make a Spongebob reference, because I grew up watching it. In one episode, the titular Spongebob is competing against his friend Patrick, at his boss, Mr. Krabs’, behest. He has true passion and ardor for the profession of fry cook. When challenged to go forth and succeed, he yells “For the Krusty Krab!” Patrick, meanwhile, yells “Because you told me to!” (referring to Plankton, Krabs’ adversary.) And all the children laugh, because it is obviously ridiculous that “Because you told me to!” is a good reason to participate in something when compared to true devotion.
So no, God had no intention of shackling us to his purpose, because that is not as valuable to him as the real deal. Again, he relates to us in a personal way, in a communal way. We are distinct from the rest of creation in this manner. Does God care about not violating our will? Of course not, he is sovereign, he laughs at the plans of the nations. But he certainly values our genuine devotion moreso than the alternative. You see the difference in perspective? The incorrect way of looking at this highlights man’s preciousness, the other highlights God’s position as the ultimate object of worth and the only measure. And, of course, while he values our uniqueness (as distinct human individuals, plus ‘or else there would’ve only been one human’), he won’t have in his community (at the end) anybody who isn’t like him. That is why this argument is not human-centric in the slightest. It is all about what God values.
To recap: Is anything I’ve said human-centric? Nope. It’s based on God’s value system and has him as the focal point. “Why didn’t God shackle us at the beginning” is answered partly by the fact that he values genuine devotion over empty ritualism. So we must recast the question: “Why didn’t God solve the problem of evil when it arose or before it arose?”  
Really, all the opponent has here is: "God let them Adam and Eve screw up and then didn't fix the problem as fast as I would like, or as I would think he should."
Which brings us to the fact that God did in fact solve the problem immediately. We see signs of Christ even in Genesis 3, and the true form of salvation from sin was always available (indeed even in the Garden, trust was the rent due for peace with God). There was, of course, a delay between the Fall and Christ's name and life specifically revealed, and Scripture acknowledges it. Verses such as Hebrews 11:13 reveal this to us:
"These all died in faith, not having received the things promised, but having seen them and greeted them from afar, and having acknowledged that they were strangers and exiles on the earth."

Hebrews 3:16-19 back us into it, revealing that it has always been unbelief, a lack of trust in God and much trust in ourselves, that has denied us a relationship with the Father:
"For who were those who heard and yet rebelled? Was it not all those who left Egypt led by Moses? And with whom was he provoked for forty years? Was it not with those who sinned, whose bodies fell in the wilderness? And to whom did he swear that they would not enter his rest, but to those who were disobedient? So we see that they were unable to enter because of unbelief."

You see, throughout the Old Testament, prior to Christ, there were still individuals who were saved, yes? Who as Scripture states, were not saved through the law, but by faith. See these verses from Galatians 3:
"Having begun by the Spirit, are you now being perfected by the flesh? Did you suffer so many things in vain—if indeed it was in vain? Does he who supplies the Spirit to you and works miracles among you do so by works of the law, or by hearing with faith … Know then that it is those of faith who are the sons of Abraham. … So then, those who are of faith are blessed along with Abraham, the man of faith."

Christ also, in John 3 when talking with a teacher of the law, chastised him for not knowing about things like "Hey you need the indwelling Holy Spirit and to have a new spirit created within you." Faith has always been there. Before Christ was revealed, of course, there was a general messianic hope, Isaiah called him the "Servant," and he shows up all over the place in the Old Testament. Here are a few verses that show us that the way to be saved has always been the same:
Psalm 51:10-11:
"Create in me a clean heart, O God, and renew a right spirit within me. Cast me not away from your presence, and take not your Holy Spirit from me."

Psalm 87:5-6:
"And of Zion it shall be said, 'This one and that one were born in her'; for the Most High himself will establish her. The Lord records as he registers the peoples, 'This one was born there.'"

Nehemiah 9:20:
"You gave your good Spirit to instruct them and did not withhold your manna from their mouth and gave them water for their thirst."

Isaiah 32:15-17, (which comes right after a proclamation of judgement and total destruction due to sin and rebellion):
"until the Spirit is poured upon us from on high, and the wilderness becomes a fruitful field,
    and the fruitful field is deemed a forest. Then justice will dwell in the wilderness, and righteousness abide in the fruitful field. And the effect of righteousness will be peace, and the result of righteousness, quietness and trust forever."

Look at these verses from the end of Psalm 2 wrapping around into the beginning of Psalm 1:
"The LORD said to me, 'You are my Son; today I have begotten you. … Kiss the Son, lest he be angry, and you perish in the way, for his wrath is quickly kindled. Blessed are all who take refuge in him. … Blessed is the man who walks not in the counsel of the wicked, nor stands in the way of sinners, nor sits in the seat of scoffers; but his delight is in the law of the LORD, and on his law he meditates day and night. He is like a tree [trans]planted by streams of water that yields its fruit in its season, and its leaf does not wither. The wicked are not so…"

This is the gospel. I have added [trans]planted is because the Hebrew verb shathal means to transplant. It is talking about a new position for the tree. Another critical note in the Hebrew is that walk stand sit are perfect tense, meaning fixed: walking is habitual lifestyle, standing is to be noted or counted among, sitting is to be associated with. The blessed man mentioned at the end of Psalm 2 has, by kissing the Son, found his life changed, and he is not and will not be among the wicked in any sense. It describes a tree next to living water that yields fruit; this is a person who is of Christ (kiss the Son), sustained by the Holy Spirit (transplanted by streams of water) and produces a harvest of righteousness (that yields fruit), exactly like how we describe a modern Christian.
I am tired of hearing about this, that the Old Testament is works-based or something, or there’s no talk of salvation by faith in God alone, all of this, so you will have to indulge me. Here’s yet more verses from Psalms. I want you to be like me: when someone says these things, I laugh. These quotes are not all full-ESV, some are modified to be more literal. Psalm 42:11:
“Why are you cast down, O my soul, and why are you in turmoil within me? Hope in God; for I shall again praise him, [lit:] the salvation of my face and my God.”

Psalm 34:4-7: (Who, pray tell, is the angel of the Lord? Christ, of course, in his full divinity in the Old Testament.)
“I sought the LORD, and he answered me and delivered me from all my fears. Those who look to him are radiant, and their faces shall never be ashamed. This poor man cried, and the LORD heard him and saved him out of all his troubles. The angel of the LORD encamps around those who fear him, and delivers them.” 

Psalm 37:34:
“Wait for the LORD and keep his way, and he will exalt you to inherit the land; you will look on when the wicked are cut off.”

Psalms 38-40 are something a Christian will be very familiar with. It follows the pattern of SinWrathConfessionPatience and FaithDeliverance. (38:3, 38:5, 38:18, 39:7, 40:7-10.)
Psalm 44 asks why enmity between man and God exists no matter what we do. Look here, 17-23:
“All this has come upon us, though we have not forgotten you, and we have not been false to your covenant. Our heart has not turned back, nor have our steps departed from your way; yet you have broken us in the place of jackals and covered us with the shadow of death. If we had forgotten the name of our God or spread out our hands to a foreign god, would not God discover this? For he knows the secrets of the heart. Yet for your sake we are killed all the day long; we are regarded as sheep to be slaughtered. Awake! Why are you sleeping, O Lord? Rouse yourself! Do not reject us forever!”

And then what Psalm comes after that one? Psalm 45. Psalm 45 is about a wedding between a King, no, the King, and his bride. What follows Psalm 44’s declaration that peace between man and God can’t be achieved by man, that peace is revealed as being true and present in Psalm 45. Verses 6-7 call this King God, but also say “God, your God.” Imagine being an Old Testament believer and reading these words. The messiah is God, but also has Yahweh as his God? How can this be? Revelation had not caught up yet to be as clear as today. But other Scripture available told them that the Messiah would be a human (‘root of Jesse’, the following son of David, etc.). Someone who put in the time would have been able to understand that the Messiah would be a God-man. Now, I imagine few had the pure intellect or put in the time necessary to fully comprehend such (rather, had the God-given means and motivation to do it). Blessed are we for whom the truth is plain. I mean, look at this. Psalm 49:7-9, 15 (Alec Motyer’s literal direct translation, these words are important and the ESV screws it up):
“not one will in any way whatsoever ransom even a brother, nor give to God an atonement-price for him: the ransom of their soul is a costly matter, and one must give it up for ever, that he might live on in perpetuity, not see the pit. … Surely, however, God will himself ransom my soul from the hand of Sheol because he will take me.”

I don’t know. How many more times do I need to show it? Can someone still be unconvinced that salvation has always been the same? That the promise given and the promise kept are from the same God acting across time for his people? I don’t know, so here’s a few more.

Habakkuk 2:4:
"Behold, his soul is puffed up; it is not upright within him, but the righteous shall live by his faith." (Note that yichyeh does not refer only to 'present living' in the sense of 'this is a principle he lived by', but more broadly.)

Joel 2:28-29 & 32 mentions the Holy Spirit, and is quoted in Acts 2:17-18; so while forward looking, I feel it is still applicable:
"'And it shall come to pass afterward, that I will pour out my Spirit on all flesh; your sons and your daughters shall prophesy, your old men shall dream dreams, and your young men shall see visions. Even on the male and female servants in those days I will pour out my Spirit. … And it shall come to pass that everyone who calls on the name of the Lord shall be saved."

There are others, such as verses in Jeremiah 31 (9-11 but more relevantly 31 onwards refer to the New Covenant), Ezekiel 11 (14-21, but specifically 19), Deuteronomy 30 (1-9, specifically 6 reference the action of God, not man)… you get the idea. One finds ample acknowledgement that the Holy Spirit is acting in the Old Testament, and will act in the future, and that salvation is from the Lord and by the Lord. As a thought experiment, let's look at this testimony: "I was a slave in a foreign land, doomed to die there. Then the great mediator came to me from God with a promise of deliverance. I trusted God's promise, and when destruction came, I was saved by the blood of the lamb. Then I, we, all of his people, were led away from the foreign land, led away from death, by him. Now, I walk the path to the Promised Land, still led by the mediator. Though I stumble, he will not let me fall, he will make sure I get there if I trust God."
Who is speaking? A Christian today, or an Ancient Israelite who survived the Exodus? Both, nearly word for word it's the same, with certain exceptions like the true mediator has been revealed in Christ. Salvation, truth, they have not changed. The way in which you are rescued permanently from evil has not changed, even from the time of the garden. All Adam and Eve had to do was trust God. The answer has never changed: trust God over yourself. It is just that because of the Fall, our flesh has been infected by evil, so we are slaves to it and cannot hope to resist without the indwelling Holy Spirit. When the day of the Lord comes, everything will be made permanent, concrete. But it has always been there for mankind to take (rather, be given).  
You can follow the gospel from now backwards to Bernard of Clairvaux, Anselm, Augustine of Hippo, Origen, to the letters of the New Testament, to Isaiah, Exodus, and beyond. "Don't you remember?" exhorted Paul. "Haven't you read?" exhorted Christ.  It goes all the way back. What's my point? My point is that we misunderstand and forget today, they misunderstood and forgot then, but it's always been there: you can trace the gospel from right now all the way back to Adam.
Anyways, let's look at an example in Isaiah 15-16, an oracle concerning Moab. Moab was a gentile nation that had often had… tense relations with Israel, and I can summarize this no better than Alec Motyer in his commentary on Isaiah: "…Isaiah lifts a certain tract of history on to a new level: a Gentile people is in dire straits (15:1-9) and turns to Zion for help (16:1-4a); it hears the reply that the time of aggression is temporary but the throne of David is permanent (16:4b-5), an implicit invitation to find security by coming under the governance of Zion and the shadow of the Davidic king; Moab, however, cannot bear to lose face in this way; pride inhibits responding even to such good news (16:6), and in consequence Moab's sorrows continue (16:7-11); there is no other refuge (16:12), and only destruction awaits (16:13). Isaiah's purpose is … to use history to depict truth: the needy can find salvation by identifying with the people of God and coming within the embrace of his promises, but pride is a killer." 
Again, with our individuated wills, we choose our own way over his, but as I have said, he comes to us over and over to show us the way out. That is why I find the "he didn't fix it as fast as I would like" to be again placing the blame where it does not belong. Men do evil, men reject God. We endure the fruits of their failings and our own. 
"Okay sure, so there's always been a solution," you say, "but then why, if God knew we would sin, and hates evil, would he put the tree there? He knew this would lead to evil. He allowed evil to exist."
I’ve discussed why the trees were there at length, but this phrasing of the question brings us directly to the existence of evil. As part of the discussion, I will use three axioms that get tossed around about God:
1.	If God is unable to prevent evil, then he is not omnipotent.
2.	If God is not willing to prevent evil, then he is not perfectly good.
3.	If God is both willing and able to prevent evil, then why does evil exist?
Number 1 is easy to dismiss, biblically; God has demonstrably prevented and/or defeated evil of all orders; up to the ultimate evil, Satan. The Bible makes no claims that God is unable to prevent evil; so attacking it along these lines is fruitless.
Numbers 2 and 3 are where we get into actually interesting questions. Number 2's inherent flaw is rather subtle, but the flaw lies in the assumption that the total prevention of evil is the ultimate good. The person who makes this argument is essentially saying that "there being zero evil must mean there is only good, which is perfect goodness." But is it? You cannot prove that; this only guarantees that you only have good, or if you want to allow for trinary judgement, only good and 'neutral'.
It does not guarantee that you have maximum or perfect goodness. You could easily have a world with the presence of some evil, that has more overall good, no? (If I like red flowers, and I have an infinite expanse of flowers, some of which are red and some of which are blue, do those blue ones detract from the red ones? No.) Which means one cannot claim that if God is unwilling to prevent all evil he is not perfectly good, since you cannot prove that the total lack of evil is equivalent to the maximum or perfect good. Second, merely lacking evil does not produce good per God's definition of it, or render the amount that is there maximal or perfect.  Which is broadly the failure of Number 3. It assumes that:
1.	God must act on our preferred schedule, i.e. that acting as soon as possible will result in the perfect/maximal good. 
2.	It fails the same way as number 2, with the assumption that a total lack of evil is equivalent to the perfect or maximal good. Again, this cannot be demonstrated, and the premise falls flat.
God, throughout Scripture, demonstrates the inherent falsehood of these arguments. He uses evil for good constantly. He uses horrible people to effect great goods in the world. Indeed, he uses the torture and murder of his Son for the greatest good of all. 
So we see that God will tolerate the existence of evil in order to bring about a greater good through it. An example of him doing such can be found in Genesis 50:20:
"You intended to harm me, but God intended it for good to accomplish what is now being done, the saving of many lives."

Of course, his justice demands that sin and evil be destroyed in the future, and they will be; just not on our time schedule. The book of Habakkuk details God using the Babylonians, in their great evil, to exercise his justice. Isaiah discusses conquerors being used to liberate Israel herself. So God too uses our suffering for good. For a more in-depth discussion of this, including an example using Genesis 15:16, see Special Article O.
Thus we find that the question of evil has been reduced to this: "I want evil to all be removed when I want it done." And to me, that is not enough to eliminate God as plausible, that he will remove evil on a different schedule than the one I would prefer. Such is the prerogative of an omniscient God. It's a human conceit to assume that if there were a God, he would agree with us about everything. 
The final answer is thus that God wanted us to willingly love him, to willingly choose his offered gift of eternal life and joy. But, he knew not all of us would accept it and by nature we would rebel, and so he decided to use the evil we would cause to bring about an even greater good in the end  and save those he wished to save. Rebellion was inevitable, but he offered us guidance on what was right and what was wrong. We rejected that guidance, and God already had something in place to bring us out of that rebellion.
This I think is the principal counter to the "superior created being" or "no tree" arguments: we cannot guarantee that a world without any evil would be more perfect or have the maximum amount of good in it. If God can use the existence of evil for an even greater good, to further his goals, then the existence of evil does not invalidate God and we have our answer.
Now, the section used to end there. But then I had a wonderful discussion with an atheist counterpart of mine, whereby he examined my arguments and came back with refutations. The first thing he said was: "I'm willing to grant that some evil can be used to make the world a better place. But that does not account for all the evil in the world: there exists unnecessary evil. And so long as there is unnecessary evil in the world, the problem stands."
That is, of course, predicated upon this statement, which is quite agreeable: Between two otherwise equivalent systems, the one that only has the necessary or useful evil in it is superior.
Now, I could always resort to saying "prove that there exists an unnecessary evil," but that… doesn't seem right, now does it? It feels slimy, it feels shady. I don't like relying on that, but thankfully Christians don't have to.
Instead, let's start with: "how are we defining evil?" I have been over this, but again, in Scripture, the only intrinsic evil is, of course, deviation from God's commands. Evil is thus sin, which is rebellion against God. (Sometimes people try to use another definition of evil when debating me, and I simply shrug and say "No clue. Ask someone who isn't a Christian and uses that definition of evil." Of course, much if not most of what we commonly call evil is sin. But definitions matter.)
Only sin is inherently, intrinsically evil. "But what about needless suffering? How can your God claim to be loving if there is needless suffering?" comes the reply. Now, God plans to eliminate suffering for his people (note very, very clearly that I said "his people"), Revelation 21:4:
"'He will wipe every tear from their eyes. There will be no more death' or mourning or crying or pain, for the old order of things has passed away."

The reply is: "Ok, so you're going to argue that he'll end it on his schedule, and we have no right to complain. But God shouldn't let us suffer regardless." There's two, no, three biblical responses to this. First from Psalm 50:16-23:
"But to the wicked God says: 'What right have you to recite my statutes or take my covenant on your lips? For you hate discipline, and you cast my words behind you. If you see a thief, you are pleased with him, and you keep company with adulterers. 'You give your mouth free rein for evil, and your tongue frames deceit. You sit and speak against your brother; you slander your own mother's son. These things you have done, and I have been silent; you thought that I was one like yourself. But now I rebuke you and lay the charge before you. 'Mark this, then, you who forget God, lest I tear you apart, and there be none to deliver! The one who offers thanksgiving as his sacrifice glorifies me; to one who orders his way rightly I will show the salvation of God!'"

Psalm 2:1-6 shows us God's perspective even more:
"Why do the nations rage and the peoples plot in vain? The kings of the earth set themselves, and the rulers take counsel together, against the LORD and against his Anointed, saying, 'Let us burst their bonds apart and cast away their cords from us.' He who sits in the heavens laughs; the Lord holds them in derision. Then he will speak to them in his wrath, and terrify them in his fury, saying, 'As for me, I have set my King on Zion, my holy hill.'"

Now, these verses aren't directly related to our suffering. But they do show us that from God's perspective, all the nations and all the people, so, everybody who isn't God's, is in active, conscious, thoughtful, conniving, jealous rebellion against him. And he's not bothered by that. What can man do to his plans? There's a certain sense of our rebellion simply does not matter, he will accomplish his purposes. And if by choosing to be his enemies we suffer for it, we make our children for it, that's not his fault. We chose rebellion. We are evil, at our core, and cannot lay claim to his justice or mercy for we reject and rejected them. The book of Job seems aimed directly at this too. In it, God says this:
"Who has a claim against me that I must pay? Everything under heaven belongs to me."

In other words, the Scriptural response to the issue of suffering is, "I don't owe you anything, not comfort, not water." And it's true. God doesn't owe us anything. How could that be the case given our sin (it was revealed Job, thought thinking himself sinless, harbored great pride in his heart)? But the argument continues, with: "I don't like how your God does things, letting children get brain cancer is disgusting. Even if it isn't evil by his standards, he knows it's not right or else it would happen in heaven too and it won't."
Is "needless" suffering evil (if I grant, for the sake of argument, that there is such a thing)? Is it unloving? Is it unjust? These are the questions that matter. Obviously if we simply don't like how God does things that doesn't invalidate his existence, but the answers to these questions could render him contradictory or duplicitous, and we need to figure it out. If God does not owe us comfort, then we really don't have a right to complain about it. Does he owe me a body without migraines, seizures, the rest? No. Did he owe me a childhood free of my tyrannical father and subsequent worse stepfather? No. Does he even owe me the right to exist? Of course not. Here’s another variant: Did I do anything in particular to earn those experiences in particular? See Luke 13:1-5:
"There were some present at that very time who told him about the Galileans whose blood Pilate had mingled with their sacrifices. And he answered them, 'Do you think that these Galileans were worse sinners than all the other Galileans, because they suffered in this way? No, I tell you; but unless you repent, you will all likewise perish. Or those eighteen on whom the tower in Siloam fell and killed them: do you think that they were worse offenders than all the others who lived in Jerusalem? No, I tell you; but unless you repent, you will all likewise perish.'"
 
Note, I'm writing this knowing at least one survivor of repeated childhood sexual assaults is going to read it, who I know personally. I don't know who you, dear reader, are specifically, but I'm asking you to approach this rationally. Nobody likes pain. I'm not sitting here having never seen or heard or felt anguish telling you some crap about philosophy that won't survive first contact with the street outside. But what I am doing is putting the emotional recoil aside and thinking clearly about this issue, and I expect the same of you. (You may find my wording dramatic, but I have had too many conversations where the other person could not escape emotion.) The majesty of Scripture is that it hides nothing of the human experience, a man trudging through the war-torn countryside of his country, a daughter abandoned for a belt and needle… all of us can find reflected in its pages what we've seen. 
But I should summarize what I said above before continuing. God only defines evil as rebellion against him. That includes much of what we call evil, and there are many instances in Scripture where he acts against and is infuriated by evil acts of men. God does not owe us rebels comfort. He doesn’t owe anybody comfort, but especially not comfort. That is one component of the answer to the ‘problem of suffering.’
Isaiah 54:10:
"For the mountains may depart and the hills be removed, but my steadfast love shall not depart from you, and my covenant of peace shall not be removed,' says the LORD, who has compassion on you."

With that said, here's the frame of the issue about whether "needless" suffering is evil: "My version of the ideal God is better than the real God because he would end all suffering immediately." If someone stopped all suffering right now, would they be morally superior to my God? 
Again, we have no right to God's goodness due to our sin. We only have a right to, well, die before we finish blinking and be summarily kicked out of creation and off into hell. But that's not a full answer to the "Morally Superior Stopper of Suffering" challenge. What's that acronymize to? MSSOF? Sure.
We can't say suffering disproves God, though, because it doesn't necessarily mean the world we're in isn't the best for producing good according to God's definition of good, and its existence does not cause a contradiction in his character or goals. Mind, if God is omnipotent and omniscient, it stands to reason any world he made would be the one that optimally advances his goals. If you can prove the world does not do that, then it is unlikely we're in a world made by God. (It's what the three axioms challenge I gave above is really driving at.)
Humans sinned, and since sin is rebellion against an omnipotent God, he has no reason to tolerate it. So, death entered creation as a result. Environmental suffering, thus, could be called the 'birth pangs of death.'  Given that the punishment we have earned for our sins is Hell, any suffering inflicted upon us in this world would in fact be justified, as in, an extension of God's justice and consequences for our sin.
Since we are owed the misery of Hell, any misery we encounter here that is less than or equal to Hell is not unjust, and is in fact good since it is just. Any kindness beyond the eternal suffering in Hell we've earned is mercy borne of grace, which we have not earned, so saying it's unjust for one person or another to not receive that mercy doesn't hold water. You have to flip the thinking on its head; the perspective "All suffering should stop," should instead be "It's a wonder there's any mercy at all." 
Let me say that unmistakably: you should be in Hell, so the fact that you aren't means God is being patient and merciful. I should be in Hell, so when I get a migraine or a seizure or have another kidney stone, I have absolutely no right to say "Curse you God for this suffering! The MSSOF wouldn't've given me this migraine!" 
It occurs to me that if you've never been told that before, it might feel a bit like I just punched you. People who have endured more than I can claim to, or are currently, and anybody else, probably aren't going to get a whole lot of love out of that statement. But this is the logic Jesus used, see Matthew 10:28-31:
"And do not fear those who kill the body but cannot kill the soul. Rather fear him who can destroy both soul and body in hell. Are not two sparrows sold for a penny? And not one of them will fall to the ground apart from your Father. But even the hairs of your head are all numbered. Fear not, therefore; you are of more value than many sparrows."

Scripture points us to the proper eternal perspective, but also tells us God has us in his eye and hands. You and I and anybody else are not supposed to act like evil isn't evil and is somehow good. It's simply not unjust that we endure it. When Christ discussed the slaughter of the Galileans or the tower in Siloam falling, he didn't do that. He said "Yep, sucks, and worse'll happen to you if you don't escape evil." That eternal perspective is absolutely necessary. I imagine it won't strike home to people who don't believe God is real, but again, I'm after his consistency contingent upon Scripture being correct. A child with brain cancer is abhorrent to us, and rightly so.   But it has no invalidating power over whether God exists or not when you get down to it.
Let me paraphrase a reply I got to the above: "If anything this sounds more like a tyrannical and evil god being explained away. Damning an entire species, even or perhaps especially one you created, is pretty insane."
Why would an omnipotent God tolerate rebellion at all? Mercy. Everyone who fails to repent and choose Christ, when called, should instantly die. They don't, though, so rather than a great wasp of a God who stings instantly, we have a patient God who tolerates us. He does not spare us from the consequences of our evil all the time and to our specifications, but it's not like he does nothing; he declares that he wields history like a rod and an axe. He comforts the afflicted, he cares for us, he sends rain for all. My argument is that we have no right to demand he use history to our specification. Does that make sense? He does stop evil, he does prevent suffering, he simply does it to his standard and as he wishes as opposed to how we wish. The MSSOF would, if it acted as we want to, kick all of us out of creation! You and I have both hurt others, and we will hurt more people, and we hurt creation with our corruption.  
Rather than a tyrannical and evil God, we have a merciful God who patiently tolerates our failure and has given us a chance to be redeemed. The funny thing about the Christian faith is that we are saved by God - from God. He didn't even damn us; we have damned ourselves by our actions. No one is compelled to sin by God. Or are they?



SOVEREIGNTY AND RESPONSIBILITY


At the tail of the last chapter I ask whether or not we are compelled to sin by God; the question is more broadly framed as “how are God’s sovereignty and our responsibility not contradictory?” This sounds fairly academic, so let me reframe it again: “How is it right for a divine God to send me to hell if I couldn’t possibly have become a follower of his against his will?” Part of the question is certainly, “what does it mean to be guilty?” But I think we must remember that Scripture does not only describe sin in terms of guilt – but also, if not dominantly, in terms of corruption and purity. 
I don’t want to get ahead of myself, so I’ll first spend a bit of time establishing that God cannot do evil, and then that we are responsible for our own evil (according to Scripture). That will dovetail into the “but how?” portion. 1 John 1:5: 
"This is the message we have heard from him and proclaim to you, that God is light, and in him is no darkness at all."

James 1:13:
"Let no one say when he is tempted, 'I am being tempted by God,' for God cannot be tempted with evil, and he himself tempts no one."

1 Timothy 2:3-4:
"This is good, and pleases God our Savior, who wants all people to be saved and to come to a knowledge of the truth."

One, God as defined cannot do evil (if he did it he would approve of it and it would be good…) or tempt us with it (same reasoning). If we were forced to do it through his knowledge, then he would be doing evil since he made us do it. Obviously, if God is not responsible, then we are (us and the serpent). "Ok, Scripture says we're responsible. But since God created us knowing we would commit evil, and we do evil, he is responsible for it regardless of if 'the Bible' says otherwise. That's a fair accusation of circular reasoning."
I'm not using the above as circular reasoning to escape the argument. I'm simply giving Scripture's position on the matter as an entry point. Sartre, a philosopher, once said: "beings who possess free will cannot coexist with an omnipotent and omniscient God."
 This is completely correct! And consistent with what I said towards the end of the last chapter, starting with the Exodus and Ezekiel argument. We absolutely cannot. Why do you think creation is full of death, specifically death?  Why do you think Hell exists? The New Testament describes the process of sanctification, begun upon being reborn by the Holy Spirit. That process, in a word, is us becoming more Christlike. What does that entail? The replacing of our will with God's will. We will either have our will replaced by God's, or go to Hell. But our will is not "free." It is bent to our household. (And all the other various things I’ve said about individual as opposed to free wills already.)
Having our will replaced with his (or totally bent to his) is to our advantage. God is perfect. His decisions are perfect, his happiness and love and joy are perfect, by definition, given his nature (and that he made and will remake us to consider those things perfect as well). We could never achieve those things on our own. Thus, it is entirely to our advantage to replace our will with his (or if I am misspeaking, then say instead that our will shall be entirely bent to his), so we stop getting in our own way. And, if we reject his will, he says "Okay, you don't want anything to do with me? I will abandon you to the things you have made and take all of my self away from you. That means you will have nothing good." And so we get Hell. I’ll say it again: God's goodness is a gift, membership in his household is a gift. Truth is a gift. He certainly created us as a people with whom to share himself and these gifts, but if we reject him, we reject them. As Psalm 135 reminds us 26 times, he has made us, pursued us, fought for us, all the rest - because he is loving. Further! As Psalm 25:8 tells us, the goodness and uprightness of God, the very things we offend, are the reason he bothers to teach us what good is. 25:12 says much the same:
“Who is the man who fears the LORD? Him will he instruct in the way that he should choose.”

And Psalm 31:21 has this for us,  a reminder that God is there for us while our world is on fire (perhaps literally):
“Blessed be the LORD, for he has wondrously shown his [committed] love to me when I was in a besieged city.”
 
Psalm 33:18-19 echoes a similar sentiment. So God pursues us, but we have a choice in the matter. 2 Peter 1:10: “Therefore, brothers, be all the more diligent to confirm your calling and election, for if you practice these qualities you will never fall.”

He holds us responsible for that decision. Someone will ask, "How is that loving? Isn't your God supposedly loving? If he loved us, he'd force us to say yes." Please, hold that thought. The rest of this chapter and the next chapter on Hell answer it. But don’t forget that I’ve addressed this before in part; we aren’t owed his mercy or his gifts of goodness by virtue of us being rebels. For a Christian perspective, please read Psalm 31, specifically 9-17, verses like Psalm 35:17 (also 37:1, 9, 10… Jeremiah 12 is about this as well) which literally asks God “How long, O Lord, will you look on?” It also tell us that trusting questions are not in and of themselves sinful. 
Here's the thing: God did not create evil, but he allowed and allows it to exist, clearly. Anyone who has chosen evil deserves Hell, and so evil inflicted to them here is no longer evil, for it cannot exceed the punishment they deserve already. It is instead mercy that we endure less than Hell. Psalm 10:1 asks, "Why, O LORD, do you stand far away? Why do you hide yourself in times of trouble?"

Psalm 10 then talks of evildoers who declare there to be no God and no justice, who prey on the weak and powerless. It calls for God to "break the arm of the wicked and evildoer". It says God reigns, he hears the pain of the afflicted, he strengthens their heart and lends him their ear to "do justice to the fatherless and the oppressed, so that man who is of the earth may strike terror no more." Psalm 41:3, in a more literal rendering, says: 
“Yahweh will support him on his sickbed; all his bed you rearrange in his sickness.”

Why do I bother to say all that? Because I cannot resist the need to demonstrate God’s love in this, to argue against the accusation that he is not loving, and that a lack of love does not prompt our being given responsibility. I am repeating information from the “why did he make us” part of the book, though, so let’s move on. "Why didn't he prevent the evildoer from doing the evil? Why does he deliver justice after the fact? Why does he let me be sick instead of supporting me on my sickbed and changing my sheets or whatever?" For one, he gives us all the same chance to repent. Two, if he punished somebody before they'd done something evil, even if he knows they'll do it, none of us would exist. Where exactly would you like that line? "Just prevent the most heinous acts done to the most vulnerable." Why does the line fall there? Define heinous. Define vulnerable. Can you tell me? No, you can't come up with an objective reason for why the line should be there. What these questions reveal is a clamor for justice and care deep in our hearts. Who put that there do you wonder?
I don't intend to argue along that line, except to say this: he does prevent evil. Don't mistake me, he roots it out and destroys it. Christ was kinda here to do away with evil, to defeat it, no? He will end all sickness and discomfort and pain. Psalm 5 says the following:
"…Give ear to my words, O LORD; consider my groaning. Give attention to the sound of my cry, my King and my God, for to you do I pray. … For you are not a God who delights in wickedness; evil may not dwell with you. The boastful shall not stand before your eyes; you hate all evildoers. You destroy those who speak lies; the LORD abhors the bloodthirsty and deceitful man. … For there is no truth in their mouth; their inmost self is destruction; their throat is an open grave; they flatter with their tongue. Make them bear their guilt, O God; let them fall by their own counsels; because of the abundance of their transgressions cast them out, for they have rebelled against you. But let all who take refuge in you rejoice; let them ever sing for joy, and spread your protection over them, that those who love your name may exult in you. For you bless the righteous, O LORD; you cover him with favor as with a shield."

Remember, this chapter is not just about responsibility, but also sovereignty. God deals with evil and pain on his schedule, not ours. We can be harmed, abused, wronged, but he is the only one that can be sinned against. 



I’ve said “no one is innocent but Christ” a few times. So let’s look at those we generally consider innocent, children and infants, and a few specific Old Testament examples. Really, I shouldn’t be using the terms innocent and guilty here – Scripture uses the terms corrupted and pure. But when I say innocent, I mean in the specific matter at hand. It makes no sense for an infant to be legally guilty of something, but it is entirely possible for a baby to be corrupted. 
First up is after David has sex  with Bathsheba and subsequently murdered her husband (had him murdered, . His crime was ultimately against God, though, not Uriah, for God sets morality and God has authority: Uriah was harmed, of course, but whose law was transgressed by this act? David, in Psalm 51:4, says this:
"Against you, you only, have I sinned and done what is evil in your sight, so that you may be justified in your words and blameless in your judgement."

 After David sinned, one of the consequences of David's sin was that the child born to David by Bathsheba would die:
"However, because by this deed you have given great occasion to the enemies of the Lord to blaspheme, the child also who is born to you shall surely die … And the Lord struck the child that Uriah's wife bore to David, and it became very ill … Then on the seventh day it came to pass that the child died" 
 
	There's no wriggling out of this: God killed the child. This perhaps seems shocking or unique on the face of it, but we know God killed children in the flood of Noah. When Sodom and Gomorrah were destroyed, there were doubtlessly children and infants there as well. I have heard it argued that "Oh well, God didn't actually kill the child; in 1 Chronicles 10:13-14 it says God put Saul to death, when we know from 1 Samuel that Saul killed himself." But the difference is that yes, often things God permits are established as things God did in the Old Testament; but not in this case. In this case we are told, specifically, literally, that God struck the child and it got sick and died. 
David's child was conceived in sin, and born as a consequence of sin. Much like God used the murder and torture of his own son to handle sin, God used the sickness and death of David's child to handle David's sin, although in a disciplinary as opposed to the redemptive manner of Christ. Does that make sense? God used the sickness and death of the child for good, for his justice. I would argue you can never verify that the death of a supposed innocent (or one certainly innocent in a specific matter) was used for no greater purpose.
Since the death of the child was used for good, I would dismiss the charge of it being evil on those grounds. But opponents have responded with some variation of the following a few times:
1.	The death of an innocent is always morally evil regardless of any good it causes.
2.	A perfectly good God would not kill innocent children.
3.	The Christian God kills innocent children.
4.	The Christian God cannot be perfectly good.

The logical error is this: these postulates assume that the death of an innocent child is, without exception, evil. Of course, we can discuss whether they are truly innocent in the first place, which I will do later on. (Innocent and guilty aren’t really the right words in the context of infants and such, the better words would be “corrupted” or “pure”.) Matthew 16:26 says this:
"For what will it profit a man if he gains the whole world and forfeits his soul? Or what shall a man give in return for his soul?"

James 4:14:
"What is your life? For you are a mist that appears for a little time and then vanishes."

In Matthew, Christ is relating the relative value of your immortal soul to anything physical; in James, we see another comparison of the absolute value of our physical lives here on earth. To us, our lives are a big deal; they are, after all, the only one we've got, and the only one we know. But God sees our bodies, when put in perspective with our soul, as not much more than clothes we've put on, possessions. 1 Corinthians 6:12-20 tells us the body still has value, and where that value comes from: being a temple for the indwelling Holy Spirit, that was bought by the death and resurrection of Christ. If the redeemed person's body was "purchased" in this manner and is God's, and its value is how it serves God, then according to Scripture, our bodies in and of themselves are not worth much in perspective. I say that to clarify, the human loss when someone, anyone dies, especially an infant or child, is severe. There is a graveyard near my house I frequently walk in, and there's a small headstone for a baby who only lived for five days. Every Easter, there is a basket with a small lamb toy and eggs in it on that grave. The grave is over forty-five years old. 
Even Christ cried when Lazarus died. I have my own experiences of death, and so do those close to me, so don't mistake what I'm saying. I am not saying death isn't a painful experience for those left behind, or painful at the time for those who die themselves. Death remains a divine curse upon creation, the chief weapon of Goliath.
But see below Paul in Philippians 1 describing his view on death. I should note, Paul did not die happily, and knew he wouldn't. He was executed after his trial in Rome, and long endured prison and suffering:
"…now as always Christ will be honored in my body, whether by life or by death. For to me to live is Christ, and to die is gain. If I am to live in the flesh, that means fruitful labor for me. Yet which I shall choose I cannot tell. I am hard pressed between the two. My desire is to depart and be with Christ, for that is far better. But to remain in the flesh is more necessary on your account."  
	
	The proper attitude to death is additionally found in Psalm 39 and 2nd Corinthians 15-17 – don’t make light of it, and do not make it out as worse for the Christian than it is. For the redeemed, to die is to leave the fallen world and go and be with Christ. For the unredeemed, to die is to end the time of mercy and go to judgement (more on Hell in the next chapter), so claiming that death is always morally evil is yet more unfounded, regardless of whether one is innocent or not. On the one hand, it is a certain upgrade. On the other, it is the end of unearned mercy and patience. Isaiah 57 offers some closing thoughts on the matter of death:
	"The righteous man perishes, and no one lays it to heart; devout men are taken away, while no one understands. For the righteous man is taken away from calamity; he enters into peace; they rest in their beds who walk in their uprightness."

	Isaiah is telling us people will misinterpret the death of the righteous, that they go to peace, away from calamity and evil, to God's peace and rest. But he does not stop there:
	"But you, draw near, sons of the sorceress, offspring of the adulterer and the loose woman. … Are you not children of transgression, the offspring of deceit … Among the smooth stones of the valley is your portion; they, they, are your lot; … Have I not held my peace, even for a long time, and you do not fear me? I will declare your righteousness and your deeds, but they will not profit you. When you cry out, let your collection of idols deliver you! The wind will carry them all off, a breath will take them away. …"

	There's a lot there that I won't unpack, but you can get the gist of what's being said I trust, it's fairly blunt. There are two options: for those going to Hell, death isn't morally problematic, and for those not, death still isn't morally problematic. (Excluding that death only exists because of the Fall. I mean in terms of God’s rightness to inflict us with such.) The death of the innocent is thus gain for them; they go straight to God's peace and joy. Again, do not mistake my point. I am not saying Christians should kill themselves to go be with God. Christians are called to do work here in this fallen world, and that is the very point Paul made. We have things we need to do for God's kingdom, and since we have been purchased, our time to die is not rightfully in our hands. I am tired of hearing fools claim Christians should want to kill themselves. There is a tension we must hold in place that death is a divine curse upon creation, that it causes immense suffering and is often painful. Yet for the Christian, it is a joyous going.  
	Here is Christ discussing this very topic in John 21 with Peter, concerning how Peter was going to die violently and John was to die of old age:
"…Truly, truly, I say to you, when you were young, you used to dress yourself and walk wherever you wanted, but when you are old, you will stretch out your hands, and another will dress you and carry you where you do not want to go.' (This he said to show by what kind of death he was to glorify God.) And after saying this he said to him, 'Follow me.' 
Peter turned and saw the disciple whom Jesus loved following them, … When Peter saw him, he said to Jesus, 'Lord, what about this man?' Jesus said to him, 'If it is my will that he remain until I come, what is that to you? You follow me!'"

	Christ makes the point fairly clear here, I think, that it's got nothing to do with us, that God is sovereign over our fates, and uses them as he will for his maximal glory. Furthermore, in Luke 13, Jesus commented on two recent events: one was the slaughter of a group who had gone to the temple by Pilate. Another was the fall of a tower that killed eighteen people. Christ, then, rejected the notion that suffering on Earth is proportional to sinfulness, and that tragedy is a certain sign of special or particular judgement. From John 9:
	"As he passed by, he saw a man blind from birth. And his disciples asked him, 'Rabbi, who sinned, this man or his parents, that he was born blind?' Jesus answered, 'It was not that this man sinned, or his parents, but that the works of God might be displayed in him.'"

	Christ, of course, then proceeded to fix his eyesight, so the story goes in Scripture. This, like the death of David's child, is an example of an affliction being used for God's good, of death and suffering being for his glory. (I would not go so far as to turn those verses into a maxim, that they're all the evidence or justification needed to say all suffering is for God's glory.) I suppose stating that suffering being non-proportional to sinfulness could seem like injustice to some,  but creation is the land of mercy. If mercy is a gift, it's no injustice for it to be bestowed unequally among recipients. 
[][][][][]He recognizes our plight and hates evildoers, and deals with them as he sees fit. We are asked to trust him and seek his deliverance, to praise and respect his sovereignty. He will mete out justice if and when forgiveness is rejected (and repentance not undertaken). Exodus 4:11:
"Then the LORD said to him, 'Who has made man's mouth? Who makes him mute, or deaf, or seeing, or blind? Is it not I, the LORD?"

	Psalm 105:15 (concerning the Egyptians):
	"He called down famine on the land and destroyed all their supplies of food;"

	2nd Kings 17:25:
	" And at the beginning of their dwelling there, they did not fear the LORD. Therefore the LORD sent lions among them, which killed some of them."

The Christian God has mechanisms in place to handle evil. He offers two ways to get rid of it: his justice, or his mercy. Like a broken record I’ll hear “he should handle evil sooner," and we’re right back to “whose schedule matters more”? Really, the more you probe this, the more you run into matters of opinion. It’s a binary, though: either evil invalidates God or it doesn’t; there is no threshold of evil that can be defended. And the answer I have laid out is that it does not (wait a page or so and I’ll tackle this more thoroughly). Nobody pure and innocent suffers from evil, except God who willingly subjected himself to it while here as a man. We can disagree and express different preferences, but the way he's done it is consistent and reasonable by his definitions and goals. 
"How many people want a choice to do evil or not? How many people would rather just be slaves and there be no suffering? I'd rather everyone be a righteous slave by design than have this world."
The reply is quick and easy: clearly not, because every day you choose to sin. By our every sin, we affirm the way God has chosen to set things up. The difference between a Christian and someone who rejects God is not whether or not they approve of us being allowed to do evil: we've all said that we like being able to do evil. So say that all you want, but your actions prove otherwise. 
Another rebuttal I get is this, and it more about the MSSOF: "I want you to say everything you just said while standing at Auschwitz, at the showers with nail marks in metal, and tell me it doesn't sound cheap." One reader had a rather forceful version of this objection: "Your god allows child rapists. He watches children get raped, and says 'I'm going to punish you for that eventually.' Any sane person would stop the rape of a child they saw occurring. Your god isn't worthy of my love, whether or not it 'invalidates' him from a logical standpoint." Psalm 13 expresses this question in a non-sinful manner, verses 1-4:
“How long, O LORD? Will you forget me forever? How long will you hide your face from me? How long must I take counsel in my soul and have sorrow in my heart all the day? How long shall my enemy be exalted over me? Consider and answer me, O LORD my God; light up my eyes, lest I sleep the sleep of death, lest my enemy say, 'I have prevailed over him,' lest my foes rejoice because I am shaken.”

Psalm 22 is an even more emotional account of the same. We've been over this by this point, but this is a sobering topic, and the way I’ve presented it is not how many of us are used to thinking about this problem. Actually, it's probably not sobering, even! I've possibly upset you. Who, upon hearing, "the worst day of your life was still better than you deserve," is going to go, "gee thanks, let me think about that you might be right"?  
Truth is truth even amidst horror (perhaps especially so), so the answer is the same: upon what grounds does anybody demand more mercy from him for the human race? They want him to stop evil right now, but when I say, "Ok, before you finish blinking you'll be in hell," out comes the "wait wait wait not my evil that evil," followed up by explanations that "obviously we're talking about the real evil that's out there," so it's always some other evil we deem too bad to be allowed, never our own. "I'm not as bad as that guy," they say. Certainly, they are not as bad as the literal worst of humanity. The thing is, in the end, God will make it right. God is a person of ends and eternities. He came down here and went through the thick of it too. He got beaten, mocked, whipped, stabbed by nails, betrayed, and hung on a cross. It's not like he's far away from our pain: he's intimately familiar with it. Scripture is very much solid on the idea that what matters is something’s eternal end. Transitory states are exactly that, and they will end. God is not ignorant of our plight during such states, however, hence his coming down to rescue his people from Egypt and all the rest.
None of his covenants promise us no suffering here on Earth, or among the stars, should we cooperate well enough for long enough to get there.  I see in these shock value attacks that usually they're trying to blame God as if he bears the guilt of something he didn't do. He is assuredly sovereign over it, but there's a difference. Many Psalms give us an image of someone broken, wishing for death, grabbing God with one hand and limply hitting his thigh with the other, begging to know why or when it will end. These questions boil down to something very simple yet profound: has God betrayed us by letting such things happen? Never mind theological this and that's about contradictions. Has God betrayed us? God set us on this path and sovereignly dictates that it continue. Psalm 12:5:
“'Because the poor are plundered, because the needy groan, I will now arise,' says the LORD; 'I will place him in the safety for which he longs.'”

Sometimes I have people tell me the world doesn't need another book like mine. We need "practical application" not "theological treatises defending God's existence." Well, buddy, I'm not doing that. I'm asking and answering questions that have profound impacts on how we relate to God. Doesn't get any more practical than that.  
The effects of sin are uncomfortable, the fallen aspects of our world are insufferable, depressing, sorrowful… because that is what they are. I cannot help but see some sad irony in attempts to use the worst of the fallen world in an attempt to paint God as the bad guy, when the fallen world is the very antithesis of God himself: death and evil. It's as if one pointed to the desert and said "You see? Water is disgusting! Look what happens when it is absent." You would rightly scratch your head. 
God can’t do evil, man is (as of yet, somehow) responsible for sin. Aligning ourselves with God is good. He owes us no mercy, and since we’re not in Hell, we’re all the recipients of abundant mercy and patience already. Importantly, he listens to our pain and takes action on his schedule and in his way. Sin’s effects are terrible, but they will go away. God is sovereign over evil, sovereign over us. 
I mentioned it briefly, but is all evil necessary? Could there be some unnecessary evil? I’ve gone into that there is necessary evil at length; but this is a different form of the discussion. So let’s walk through whether there is unnecessary evil, and then I will argue that God only uses evil for good, he does not cause evil for good. 
The reality here boils down to this: God must get more glory from a world with evil than one without evil. Since glory is his goal, it must somehow be enhanced by there being evil. My argument in prior chapters was this: God valued us worshiping him not out of obligation, but through trial the “proven genuineness ” of our faith, more highly than us never having committed evil in the first place. But here's the conundrum: God doesn't need anything. He's complete. He's just sharing his glory with us through this, right?
Let's let the opponent word it this way: "Is evil necessary for God's glory to be maximized (his stated goal in Scripture)? If the answer is no, why does evil exist? Wouldn't that mean the universe is not maximally good since a system could exist where there was no evil? Put another way, if God doesn't need evil to maximize his goals, why does it exist?” 
There's two ways to look at this. If we rush through the thinking, we may arrive at something like this: if the answer is no (to the first question), then there cannot be a God since he would never tolerate evil in his system, unless it was absolutely necessary for there to be evil for him to maximally accomplish his goals.
I'm going to use this phrasing of the challenge about unnecessary evil to demonstrate why we have to be careful about answering questions that are too non-specific. Because when phrased the way it has been above, the rebuttal's answer is rather obviously "No, God does not need evil to accomplish his goals." But I've already established that for the specific God of Scripture, who is a communal being whose goal is his glory being maximized, he desired to create creatures to share in it with him. Those creatures will necessarily commit evil acts (again, as argued some pages hence). So the answer becomes "Yes, there is necessary evil with regards to wanting a people for himself." Since I have established that God's chosen goal with creation necessitates making beings that necessarily commit evil, the answer has become yes. This means that the evil that exists is necessary and it is not a God-invalidating problem. If there was evil outside of a creation that necessitated it, then we would have a problem. 
Let me restate that: God decided that having a people to share himself with maximized his glory ; but any people that could be conceived of or wrought would necessarily create evil. This means there is necessary evil.
I am not saying that the Christian God needs evil; he wants a people to glorify himself with (for their good and because of his love and light – he wants to share), and that necessitates handling evil. God’s definition of perfect goodness involves perfect justice and outcome for evil – that all things be set right that evil set wrong. For this means all things are ‘right’ and thus ‘good’.) It is clear that God’s definition of “maximal good” does not include “no transient evil.” It includes “no eternal evil,” that is for sure. 
Anyway, I could very easily just say: If the coexistence of God and evil is valid under the previously described argument, then the specifics of the evil are, while not irrelevant, immaterial. But I don’t find that satisfying, so it is time to discuss God bringing good from the evil that is, rather than doing evil to produce good. Scripture! First is Romans 3:3-8:
"… Does their faithlessness nullify the faithfulness of God? By no means! Let God be true though every one were a liar, as it is written, 'That you may be justified in your words, and prevail when you are judged.'  But if our unrighteousness serves to show the righteousness of God, what shall we say? That God is unrighteous to inflict wrath on us? (I speak in a human way.) By no means! For then how could God judge the world? But if through my lie God's truth abounds to his glory, why am I still being condemned as a sinner? And why not do evil that good may come?—as some people slanderously charge us with saying. Their condemnation is just."

That quote from Psalm 51:4 (quoted by Paul within the Romans quote) really serves to make the argument: our faithlessness and unholiness only exemplify God’s holiness and faithfulness. Even when we rebel/sin/create evil, we give God more glory by amplifying his justice and his devotion to redeeming his chosen remnant. However, we should be careful about making the same argument Paul denies in that quote. Paul explains that part in Galatians 2:17-18: 
"But if, in seeking to be justified in Christ, we Jews find ourselves also among the sinners, doesn’t that mean that Christ promotes sin? Absolutely not! If I rebuild what I destroyed, then I really would be a lawbreaker."

If the body is a temple for God, and when we sin we tear down that temple… then sure, God's grace is it's abounding more, but it's just being spent rebuilding what your sin destroyed. It's not increasing the temple past where it was, it's just restoring it. There's a second way I interpret it, that's more like "if I tear the temple down, but then rebuild it, I've admitted I did something wrong. Which means I knew what I did the first time was wrong all along." So he's bluntly saying, "you're being an idiot by trying to defeat the idea that sin is bad by admitting sin is bad." Past that, and back to the Romans quote, one thing I can clearly see is that he's saying, "If God benefits from judging our sin, that doesn't mean he is wrong to judge it." These are the caveats surrounding the idea that God can use evil for good – we cannot do that. God can use our evil, but if we create evil in some twisted way to make good, we’re making unnecessary evil and that is not how this works. Scripture is here drawing a clear line between necessary and unnecessary evil, especially unnecessary evil we engage in when we know better than to do so.

The answer to this necessarily comes from responsibility for sin. Here's a long section from Jeremiah 18 (paragraph breaks added for clarity):
"The word that came to Jeremiah from the LORD: 'Arise, and go down to the potter's house, and there I will let you hear my words.' So I went down to the potter's house, and there he was working at his wheel. 
And the vessel he was making of clay was spoiled in the potter's hand, and he reworked it into another vessel, as it seemed good to the potter to do. Then the word of the LORD came to me: 'O house of Israel, can I not do with you as this potter has done? declares the LORD. Behold, like the clay in the potter's hand, so are you in my hand, O house of Israel. 
If at any time I declare concerning a nation or a kingdom, that I will pluck up and break down and destroy it, and if that nation, concerning which I have spoken, turns from its evil, I will relent of the disaster that I intended to do to it. 
And if at any time I declare concerning a nation or a kingdom that I will build and plant it, and if it does evil in my sight, not listening to my voice, then I will relent of the good that I had intended to do to it. 
Now, therefore, say to the men of Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem: 'Thus says the LORD, Behold, I am shaping disaster against you and devising a plan against you. Return, every one from his evil way, and amend your ways and your deeds.' 'But they say, 'That is in vain! We will follow our own plans, and will every one act according to the stubbornness of his evil heart.' 
'Therefore thus says the LORD: Ask among the nations, Who has heard the like of this? The virgin Israel has done a very horrible thing. …"

This section if Scripture is incredibly powerful, and I pray I wield it well. The first conclusions from it:
1.	Human actions of repentance, faithfulness, rebellion, and evil have significance. Any can turn from their evil and escape judgement by having faith in the Lord. Any can turn from the good God intends for us too, though!
2.	God advises us on what is best, and humans have two reactions to God telling us: “Impossible!” and “No!”
Romans 9:16-24 also contains a pottery section (13-16 contain some verses concerning God having the right to be merciful to who he wishes):
"For the Scripture says to Pharaoh, 'For this very purpose I have raised you up, that I might show my power in you, and that my name might be proclaimed in all the earth.' So then he has mercy on whomever he wills, and he hardens whomever he wills. You will say to me then, 'Why does he still find fault? For who can resist his will?' But who are you, O man, to answer back to God? Will what is molded say to its molder, 'Why have you made me like this?' Has the potter no right over the clay, to make out of the same lump one vessel for honorable use and another for dishonorable use? 
What if God, desiring to show his wrath and to make known his power, has endured with much patience vessels of wrath prepared for destruction, in order to make known the riches of his glory for vessels of mercy, which he has prepared beforehand for glory—even us whom he has called, not from the Jews only but also from the Gentiles?"

Phew. Ezekiel 33:11 must remain fresh in our minds; God takes no pleasure in the death of the wicked. This prompts a query of sweeping importance, one that the pureblood Calvinist says is “irreconcilable.” (I hear many say this.) But I challenge them so: anything which is truly irreconcilable is a contradiction, and that cannot be. They claim to know where God has drawn the line on what is knowable, and that cannot be. Did they design God’s words on his tongue? 
The true and deep interpretation of these has been shielded from my eyes for years. Perhaps it still is, but my best understanding, hopefully God-given, is as follows. First I want to make a point about the ‘book of life.’ See Revelation 17:8 first:
“…And the dwellers on earth whose names have not been written in the book of life from the foundation of the world …”

Psalm 69:28:
"May they be blotted out of the book of life and not be listed with the righteous."

Revelation 13:8:
"All inhabitants of the earth will worship the beast—all whose names have not been written in the Lamb’s book of life, the Lamb who was slain from the creation of the world."

Revelation 20:15:
"Anyone whose name was not found written in the book of life was thrown into the lake of fire."

There’s something to this – that it appears one can be blotted out of the book, or never written in the book in the first place. I would argue ‘not being found’ is the ultimate sense of this; what does it mean, though, that to not be found in the book can be achieved either through not being written, or being blotted out? It cannot be that when someone is saved their name is written and then blotted out if they fail; this blasphemously contradicts Christ’s clear promises. I think we find ourselves torturing an obvious analogy, really. If Scripture saying “Hey man Elijah’s gonna come back,” (Malachi 4:5-6) can end up in rebukes for thinking it literally meant Elijah would return (Matthew 17:10-13), then it is probably the case we can be rebuked for trying to take the idea of a book of life too literally. (If you and I see one another at the throne and a literal book gets pulled out, be sure to point at me and I’ll say “whoopsie.”) 
But what would ‘blotting out’ and ‘not being written’ refer to, in literal terms? Probably the concepts of a final moment of no return (attested to scripturally), and God’s sovereign election of man from the beginning. The former marks the moment one finally accedes to the fate God knew they would take from the beginning. 
Here’s a nagging thought, though, expressed by our generic detractor: “Would God condemn billions from time immemorial to display his goodness to a few? The thought is a bit repugnant, no? Why not just make the ones he intended to redeem and redeem them? We're all responsible for our sins, and God does not owe us anything, including mercy; but he still purposed them to not get saved and to go to Hell. Did he do so just to have someone to put in Hell? Why not only create the people he intended to redeem? Again, I know it's our fault we're going - Romans 1:20 says as much. But it cannot be denied he intended for billions of us to wind up in Hell. It's not so much a value judgement of ‘is God getting glory by torturing people in Hell worth the subjective torment of those in Hell,’ (however deserved), because if God says it's worth it, it is. But I more mean, ‘is that why he made people who were destined to go to Hell? To show his justice and wrath?’”
First Ezekiel 33:11, as referenced:
"Say to them, As I live, declares the Lord GOD, I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but that the wicked turn from his way and live; turn back, turn back from your evil ways, for why will you die, O house of Israel?"

Another is 2 Peter 3:9-10:
“The Lord is not slow to fulfill his promise as some count slowness, but is patient toward you, not wishing that any should perish, but that all should reach repentance. But the day of the Lord will come like a thief…”

I fully intend to argue that Hell is a good thing for the remnant and God in the next chapter. The focus here is not on Hell as a thing, but on God purposing that billions would go there, however much they deserve it. It’s entirely likely that when we’re in heaven and we see God, we will buckle with understanding the sheer injustice it is to sin against him. (We should do this now, but I suspect we can’t fully appreciate it in our current state.) 
But this still is not the point of that nagging thought. Obviously, Hell exists to punish injustice. But why make it and why allow the beings who will cause the injustice? Why not have an empty Hell? 
Do you see how those questions are a reframing of “does there exist unnecessary evil?” We would like to think that anybody who winds up in Hell has done an unnecessary evil, that it was avoidable. Was it?

The opponent says: "If God knew we would sin, as you say, and if any conceivable being would sin, he essentially created evil by creating them. Further, if God were really omnipotent and omniscient, there would be no free  will so he would be responsible for our actions, and evil is his responsibility." 
That warrants a bit of elaboration, if you’re not familiar with this argument. It follows like so: God is omniscient. Everything is therefore knowledge for him. Knowledge is immutable and previously set as true. This means everything about us and everything we’ll do is set in stone. A lot of people try to dismiss this by talking about “middle knowledge” and so much nonsense; at one point even I used random number generators (don’t ask) and such and such to try and get around this. But everybody who does this, the one making the argument and the one defending against it, makes the same logical error. They all assume	that for us to have independent wills God would have to be neither omnipotent nor omniscient. There is no reason that's the case, no contradiction can be proved. I won’t argue it by way of analogy; too many times people torture analogies made here. There is no analogy that works. But I’ll say it another way: an omniscient and omnipotent God could easily grant us from his power independent wills. Other scholars call this God’s “permissive will,” but I don’t like that terminology. God has one will.
Walk with me through something a bit out there. Look at humans as clay, clay that can be formed into pottery. Now imagine all clay is red – it is just red. To say “clay” is to invite “red.” Redness is, of course, the capacity for disobedience. So when God made clay, he made creatures with the capacity for disobedience. Blue clay, let’s say, is clay with no capacity for disobedience. 
Romans 9:13-24, feels like a sadist going "I'm choosing not to punish you, but look how I punish these other people in my prison and know my mercy," If that were correct, the reply would be, "Well, mate, you made the prison and made everyone who would go there, it’s your fault!"
But that's not correct. Let’s use the same clay analogy as a moment before. By default and necessarily, humans are red clay.  God chooses some red clay to turn blue. Red clay he sends to Hell. How is it the red clay's fault that it's red? It just is red. It can't willingly make itself blue. Part of being red may even be wanting to be red, but that's still just redness that it came with by default, right?
The core issue here is he inflicts suffering on the red clay for its redness. It seems he's decreed that, even though wanting to be red is part of redness, and there's no way to escape redness on your own and you are necessarily red to begin with, you're still at fault for redness and should suffer for all eternity. 
Here, let me push this further: He has also foreordained which red lumps of clay will become blue, so it's not like the red lumps even get a fair shot at becoming blue (indeed, 2nd Corinthians 4:4 tells us the 'god of this age' also prevents red clay from seeing light at all, so red clay is doubly screwed). It says he already knows who will become blue, so those who are doomed to be red have no choice in the matter. Said with better theological precision, they were "made for dishonorable use" such that they would inevitably choose to reject the offer to become blue. But wait, doesn't this disagree with Scripture?
Ezekiel 33:1-6  clearly establishes our responsibility, among any other number of verses. Isaiah 45:18-19:
"…'I am the LORD, and there is no other. I did not speak in secret, in a land of darkness; I did not say to the offspring of Jacob, 'Seek me in vain.' I the LORD speak the truth; I declare what is right."

Psalm 9:15-16:
"The nations have sunk in the pit that they made; in the net that they hid, their own foot has been caught. The LORD has made himself known; he has executed judgment; the wicked are snared in the work of their own hands." 
This all is rather confusing but sure sounds like it’s making a compelling case that we aren’t responsible for our sin. Yet, one cannot escape that God holds us responsible for our actions. But how? 
Well, a bit anti-climactically, he’s sort of being saying it pretty plainly this whole time. He knew us all before we were born,  and incorporated who we are into his plan. He put everyone exactly where and when he needed them to accomplish his purposes optimally. When I wrote this section, I had not yet finished studying Jeremiah, so I was delighted to find the following in Jeremiah 10:23-24:
"I know, O LORD, that the way of man is not in himself, that it is not in man who walks to direct his steps. Correct me, O LORD, but in justice; not in your anger, lest you bring me to nothing."

Consider also Psalm 33:12-15:
"Blessed is the nation whose God is the LORD, the people whom he has chosen [to be an inheritance for himself]! The LORD looks down from heaven; he sees all the children of man; from where he sits enthroned he looks out on all the inhabitants of the earth, [he who altogether shapes their heart, he who discerns all their works.]"

God knows what every possible person's choices would be when presented with whatever situations, and he saw fit to use them. Earlier in Isaiah 45 God describes using Cyrus as his tool, and I've mentioned before that God wields history as a tool, and describes himself as a rider on a horse, steering it where to go. Isaiah 10:5-11 lays this out pretty explicitly:
"Woe to Assyria, the rod of my anger; the staff in their hands is my fury! Against a godless nation I send him, and against the people of my wrath I command him, to take spoil and seize plunder, and to tread them down like the mire of the streets. But he does not so intend, and his heart does not so think; but it is in his heart to destroy, and to cut off nations not a few; for he says: 'Are not my commanders all kings? … shall I not do to Jerusalem and her idols as I have done to Samaria and her images?'"

 I think I said something pretty important too quickly there. My argument is this: the way you reconcile our responsibility with God's sovereignty and foreknowledge is that God knows us, thoroughly. He knows everybody thoroughly. And, in his wisdom, he put every person he saw fit to make exist where they needed to be so that they would accomplish his purposes. He sovereignly lets our sin unfold, he allows us to sin as we wish, and intervenes when he needs to to bring about his purposes.
God’s argument is that he has all this clay, and he refines some of it, and leaves some of it as-is. The some he leaves, receives some mercy and nice things here (relative to what it deserves), before it gets what it deserves. While it is here, he also uses it to further his goals. So the red clay is used optimally, and then because it was allowed to choose as it wanted to choose… (sit with that for a second), it then receives the fate it deserved through that choosing. Isaiah 57, quoted earlier, speaks to this (around verse 6), but so does Psalm 17:13-15:
“Deliver my soul from the wicked by your sword, from men by your hand, O LORD, from men of the world whose portion is in this life. You fill their womb with treasure; they are satisfied with children, and they leave their abundance to their infants. As for me, I shall behold your face in righteousness; when I awake, I shall be satisfied with your likeness.”

	Making red clay is not problematic, since that’s the only type of clay you can start with. Red clay suffering for its redness is justified, since it involves a decision to remain as you are in the face of what Romans 1:20 calls having no excuse to do so. Scripture is fairly clear on this, we have no excuse, yet we do so anyway because it’s what we are. Even if you tell him he is red, tell him the fate of being red, and tell him about being blue and the fate of being blue and the benefits of being blue… he will just try to take as many of those benefits without becoming blue as he can, without changing from red.
The remaining argument here is not a repetition of "God should make them all blue!" I've argued that nobody has a claim to God's mercy. Clearly, it is also not that redness (the capacity for disobedience) is in and of itself bad; God called all creation, including us, "very good" in Genesis 1:31 before we had sinned.  The actual remaining problem is this: why is red clay destined for eternal suffering instead of non-existence? Why did it exist at all?  What is God getting out of putting red clay in eternal torment that is worth their eternal torment? This is the absolutely critical question!
Frankly, he gets justice. The correct punishment for rebellion against the maximal good is the maximal bad, yes? If we don’t have any excuse for continuing in our sin, if he gave us everything necessary to not sin (recall the vineyard verses from Isaiah), if he is merciful to us despite our insistence on sinning, if he chases after us despite our perpetual running away (the book of Numbers is a story of God finding a way to bring his holiness close to his people), if he rescues us despite our hating of it, do we have a leg to stand on when he finally says “off you go to my justice” that he doesn’t have a right to do it? For the fifteenth time, we cannot declare that he must force us to abandon our sin – by now I hope you see how cheap that sounds beyond the reasons given. [][][][][][][]
In my hours of staring at this question, I returned to that best book for God sovereignly decreeing men must suffer, Job (who by the way was not sinless and so there’s no real “he suffered unjustly” claim to be made), and we find the same responses in there. 
1.	He asks us to trust him. 
2.	He informs us that we can't possibly understand what's going on or fully grasp these things, so for us to say "that's not right," is prideful ignorance. 
3.	As originator and owner of all things, he has a right to do with all things what he wills, not what those things will.  
"Is that all, Author? Wow that's… no different than what you've been saying.”
I tend to agree a bit, so, I looked at his response in Job for a while before I realized something (or God pointed me at it more likely, if it proves correct). He says "there's a system here that works, I made it, I run it, I thought of every single detail, from the high cosmos even down to where and when deer give birth; trust me." And I think that’s as far as he’s going to let us get. But two very important things:
1.	We are all individually part of that system. It’s all well and good that we approach this issue in such a general way, talking about some abstract clay man, but it’s you and God at the end of the day, and broadly the people you love and care about. But specifically it’s you and God. No individual human knows where God has assigned them, and so from the individual’s perspective, they receive the information and decide what to do with it. Scripture does not approach this issue from the viewpoint of abstract man. It always approaches it from the specific individual. That is certainly purposeful. 
2.	If the answer is simply this: God allows them to continue in their evil to serve his purpose of displaying his wrath, that is troubling if and only if you look at it from the abstract clay man. Once you zoom in on a specific person, as God does in Job, you find an evil creature that enjoys its evil and chooses it and loves doing it. 
It seems to me we’re running into the same issue as usual here. I’ve given you some different perspectives on it, but as far as I can tell, I have argued this to the point of “value judgement.” Us not liking something is certainly reason enough to not follow him, to our detriment, but it is not enough to discard him as impossible, as it is not a contradiction. 

	What follows is a conversation I had about the above that serves as something of a summary of it. It is not fully fleshed out, of course, but it may remind you of some key points I made. If you are not interested in a practical application of what I argued above, you may simply follow the question to the next chapter. It is lightly edited for grammar and clarity.
[About a woman suffering in the hospital.] "These are moments when you wonder where God is and why people have to endure this."
First, I hear you; I really do. We see suffering and pain and we can't help but recognize the wrongness of it. But we can't blame God when Goliath is right there. So let's think about this theologically. Why would God owe the lady anything? He doesn’t owe her peace or a lack of pain. How could she make a claim on him for such? Yet, God promised to remove such evil from the world on his schedule, not ours. (For some people that’s quite soon, for others not at all in this life.) Again I say, do we have a right to demand he do it on our schedule instead of his? Especially when two things are true:
1. We’re all sinful rebels who deserve immediate annihilation, meaning anything less than Hell is already merciful.
2. He knows far better than we do how the world works and what’s best.
Too often I see people stare at evil like the Israelites stared at Goliath with nothing but fear, and abandon faith.
"So even infants are sinners? The Bible says that God knows each human being before they are born so he knows who will murder and rape. which babies will die from cancer, Hitler will be born yet no divine intervention because we have 'free choice'. If humans know for sure intent to kill or injure another, they can be charged for failure to act."
Nobody can demand God stop Hitler; on what grounds could they? "God isn’t as merciful as I like, he doesn’t give me what I want or do what I think is best," is not a good argument. What actual grounds do you have that he should act on your preferred schedule and against your preferred targets? Mind that if you want God to intervene against evil, you yourself should be in hell before you finish blinking. "No not me, that other evil." Right. Not one of Hitler’s victims was innocent before God. (By the way, he was stopped - his regime crumbled into ash. But not fast enough, right?) The only person who ever got anything worse than he deserved was Jesus Christ. The rest of us get more than we deserve day in day out as God is patient with us; if we should be burning alive in hell, anything we experience here is better than that, and is merciful in comparison to where we belong. We should thus be happy that we get any mercy whatsoever, for it is far more than we deserve to be on this earth for one microsecond past our first sin.
To your first point, why would an ‘innocent’ person have any more claim to God’s mercy than anyone else? God doesn’t owe any human being anything. God knows our pain and does not like it. He will end it. But on his schedule and in his way, not ours. And we have no right and no grounds to insist anything different.

"My feelings are not swayed. God chooses not to intervene and gives no reason why. I would hope my fellow human being would intervene if I needed it. God has the power but chooses not to. The Bible says God does not give burdens we cannot bare yet thousands kill themselves because the burden is too great. No too many suffer and God does nothing."

	A few points there. In Job, God explains to us that we don’t understand, and he is in control of the system; by asking Job what the reasoning is for cosmic and even local phenomena, he implicitly tells us there is a reason. But he wants us to trust him. (Sort of the whole point of faith, and the reason for the trees in the garden, but that’s too in the weeds.) 
Second, as I said, we have no right to demand mercy from God. However, we find here a value judgement: you say a God who intervenes every time, indeed one who prevented all evil ever, is morally superior to the Christian God, who did not. But is that truly the case? Can you prove the total prevention of suffering is the ultimate moral good? I would argue it cannot be: any moral good which is predicated upon the existence of a moral ill cannot be the ultimate standard, because the ultimate standard of morality must transcend the mere absence of moral ills and encompass its own being - especially given the inherently fluid and subjective nature of suffering. (God tells us the actual standard in Scripture: his own character.)
Third, I’m not entirely sure what verse you’re quoting; the only one I know refers to him not allowing you to be tempted more than you can bear, as in, a sinning capacity. Also, someone refusing to bear something is not the same thing as them being incapable of doing so, especially with God's help. (If he chooses to provide it when asked.)
Who says he does (or has done) nothing? Second, like I said, we should all be in Hell, so the question is not "why is bad thing X happening" when the question should be "why aren’t I in Hell right now". None of us are good people having bad things happen to us. We are bad people with whom God is being patient. Again with the caveat "God knows suffering isn’t good so he will end it for his people" as he is not a masochist. He has also demonstrably tamed evil many times in the past (hence the many commands to "remember" what he did in the Old Testament, and also, of course, Christ).

(I received no further response. This does not necessarily indicate an admission of incorrectness.)


GOD, HELL, AND SECOND CHANCES

"Manches muss man mit Gewalt klarstellen."              
"Wir glauben nicht an Gewalt." 		               
"Aber sie existiert. Ob du daran glaubst oder nicht. Was, wenn nur Gewalt zum Frieden führt?"
"Liebe ist der einzige Weg."
"Schön. Krault euch den Rücken, während die Welt untergeht. Liebe ist eure Ausrede für Passivität."
And in English, note my translation is imperfect but good enough:

"Sometimes you have to clarify things with force."
"We don't believe in violence."
"Yeah but it exists. Whether or not you believe in it. What if it's the only way to peace?"
"Love is the only way [to peace]."	
"Great. Give each other back massages while the world is ending. Your 'love' is just an excuse to be passive." [Passive in the sense here of… self-centeredness or avoiding responsibility.]
-Deutschland 83, episode 5


Behold, the grave of a wicked man,
And near it, a stern spirit.
There came a drooping maid with violets,
But the spirit grasped her arm.
"No flowers for him," he said.
The maid wept:
"Ah, I loved him."
But the spirit, grim and frowning:
"No flowers for him."
Now, this is it -
If the spirit was just,
Why did the maid weep?
-Stephen Crane, The Black Riders and other Lines, XXV

Psalm 29:10-11:
“The LORD sits enthroned over The Flood; the LORD sits enthroned as king forever. May the LORD give strength to his people! May the LORD bless his people with peace!” [Mabbul is only used in Genesis 6-9: it is the Great Flood to which this psalm refers.]

If evil doesn’t contradict God, we must now look at what exactly God does with the evil that exists. Hell is troubling to many Christians, and a great many people who reject Christianity do so because they find Hell to be disturbing, or they can't reconcile the ideas of Hell and a loving God. The persons I have discussed this with who find this hard to accept tend to want to focus solely on the love aspect; they're searching for love, so they miss God's hatred of evil. You’ll hear Christians say, “Love the sinner but hate the sin,” and you’ll hear opponents say “There’s no hate like Christian love.” 
Special article (as opposed to the cereal) K is about this issue as well – it is specially dedicated to the issue of there being a Hell. God only needs to say something once, and so I provide one verse here. The rest are in the aforementioned special article (including refutations of verses Hell-deniers try to use). Christ, part of the triune person of God, gave us the most vivid depictions of Hell there are.  He described it as endless punishment, such as when he spoke in Matthew 25:46: 
"Then they will go away to eternal punishment, but the righteous to eternal life."  

	The word eternal there is aiōnios. It is the same word in both cases, and there are no modifiers. However long the eternal life is, so too will be the eternal punishment. It will be eternal, conscious torment. So! How can God, who supposedly loves us, allow us to go away to eternal punishment? God has been called evil for this, he's been called childish; it's been said that Hell is incompatible with the love of Christ. A quote from John 3:
"Whoever believes in him is not condemned, but whoever does not believe stands condemned already because they have not believed in the name of God's one and only Son. This is the verdict: Light has come into the world, but people loved darkness instead of light because their deeds were evil."

This comes right on the heels of the ever-famous John 3:16.  Jesus knew (not that he is speaking in John 3) how to discuss Hell without negating his love or purpose in love, and if you follow Christ, you must acknowledge Hell. "What about the Old Testament? Where's Hell there?"
I'm glad you asked! Right here, Isaiah 30:33.
"For a burning place has long been prepared; indeed, for the king [of Assyria] it is made ready, its pyre made deep and wide, with fire and wood in abundance; the breath of the Lord, like a stream of sulfur, kindles it."

Isaiah 34:9-10, in a section concerning God's ultimate judgement against the sinful nations, but particularly Edom, which, as Esau's descendants, are often used as a synecdoche for the whole sinful world (David was the only king to ever conquer Edom, for instance; a clear metaphor for the Davidic King who will conquer all the Evil Nations):
"And the streams of Edom shall be turned into pitch, and her soil into sulfur; her land shall become burning pitch. Night and day it shall not be quenched; its smoke shall go up forever. From generation to generation it shall lie waste; none shall pass through it forever and ever." 

These are Hell. Isaiah 30:33's reference in particular colors Hell for us; you see, when we think of Hell, we picture some sort of sterile lake of fire, where there is burning. But that is not all. The place this will be is called Topheth, Israel's refuse pile. It was at one point where heathen Israelites burned their children alive to please Molech. It is a maggoty, disgusting refuse pile for corpses, the former site where the worst crimes of idolatry were carried out, which is, when you think about it, an apt metaphor; idolatry could be called the sin, for after all, is not all sin chasing after something other than God? And, of course, what does idolatry lead to? Heinous crimes, and where those heinous crimes occur, so there will be judgement. It's ironic that the so-called 'seven deadly sins' are lacking the two biggest ones: treachery and idolatry. But I digress, Satan hath done his work well in other ways: Wall Street literally has a golden bull on it. Mankind hasn't changed a bit.
Here is Jesus in Matthew 10:28:
"Do not be afraid of those who kill the body but cannot kill the soul. Rather, be afraid of the One who can destroy both soul and body in Hell."

If we do not like Hell, we must ask ourselves: how long or hard of a sentence can be given before it's too cruel? How severe can the punishment be before God appears loveless? What would be a just punishment for sin? Ask ten people, get ten different answers. It’s as if this is a value judgement by people who would pretend to know better, or have a right to assert their idea of, what punishment fits the maximal crime of final rebellion against God. That’s kind of just a fancy way for me to say “nuh uh prove it,” so let’s move past this simple refutation. We have to see if the biblical conception of Hell does fit with the biblical character of God or not. 
First, how does God feel about Hell? Why don’t we ask him?
Deuteronomy 28:63:
“And as the Lord took delight in doing you good and multiplying you, so the Lord will take delight in bringing ruin upon you and destroying you. And you shall be plucked off the land that you are entering to take possession of it.”

In Isaiah 15:5, he says "My heart cries out for Moab"  as he is about to inflict great sorrow upon them, more than they were enduring under an Assyrian assault. Finally, Ezekiel 18:23 says this:
"Have I any pleasure in the death of the wicked, declares the Lord God, and not rather that he should turn from his way and live?"

	Thus we see the tension of God's not apologizing for his justice that demands he punish the unrepentant sinner, but his grief that we refuse to repent. Make no mistake, he is happy when he cleanses the Earth of evil, but he would prefer we repent. James 2:13 tells us that "Mercy triumphs over judgement,” and that is what is meant. I can't count the number of times in the prophetic books where God's judgement is handed down and the very next verse is God's hope and security for his chosen remnant people. This essential truth of his justice must never be forgotten; he always carries his people through his rebukes and judgements. 
The terror of an eternal Hell reveals to us more about the nature of sin. Often, atheists, and even Christians, do not understand the sickening cancer that is sin, the festering blight of the soul, the blackening of goodness that it is. This is perhaps the most dangerous of our misconceptions about our fallen world. The evidence for this is simply that of Hell; that it is considered warranted and a just end for sinners. Consider this, Christ came to save us from sin , not just Hell. How disgusting and vile is sin to God!
An atheist colleague told me that there were people who would forgive everything; that this was better than God sentencing anyone to Hell, and more loving to boot. Is it though, setting aside the argument that it is exactly loving by the biblical definition of love?  We have to look at Hell from a different perspective to see if that shakes out. This often is born out of a misunderstanding. God is a person, and he has more traits than just one. But for some reason people who espouse this sort of thinking believe God should be, or is, omnibenevolent. I hear this word, being used here to mean essentially all-loving, tossed around a lot these days. But such a God would have many flaws, and would be worse for us than a sovereign God. 
So, how exactly does Hell fit in with God's love and personhood? How could Hell be to our benefit? I contend that it is no tragedy that evil results in Hell. We have all experienced evil in some way, I will relate in a sentence my own experience of it. I endured a childhood of abuse at the hands of a tyrant drunk of a father, as did my sisters, brother, and mother. During that time, I needed the wrath of God on my side. There would have been no solace in an impotent, omnibenevolent God. Someone very near and dear to me endured years of sexual assault as a child, as well. Do you think either of these vicious, sick men could have been omniloved out of their passion for evil? No. 
Romans 12:19 tells us this: 
"Do not take revenge, my dear friends, but leave room for God's wrath, for it is written: 'It is mine to avenge; I will repay,' says the Lord." 

How could that verse be written sincerely, how could we be asked to leave justice and vengeance in God's hands if he were nothing but a pushover? If there was no bark to God's bite, he would absolutely be a fraud.  It doesn’t say “oh, leave justice and making it right to God,” it damn well says “avenge.” True, mercy triumphs over judgement, but when mercy is rejected… vengeance can be expected.
Because humans wrong one another , we're left with an inescapable choice. Will we rely on human justice, or divine justice? Some argue against any judgement at all (usually with a hypocritical edge, applying this only to things they do or like). Some argue only against divine judgement, but have no problems with human governmental courts or very often, especially on the internet, the court of public opinion; they’ll even take a large language model’s decision before they take God’s. 
Anyway, it is a low mark of comfort and security to insist that God be perfectly non-violent or nonjudgemental. This is seen as admirable, ideal even. We're told, "There are humans who would forgive literally anything," as if this is a good thing. I would certainly not want that person responsible for me. Imagine they are the only police officer for your neighborhood. Someone breaks into your house, kills your family, and burns your house down, with a promise that they will do it again to your neighbor. Up trots your perfectly nonjudgemental policeman, and he says "I saw the whole thing, do not worry, I have already forgiven him." 
The idea that non-judgement is a virtue would be laughed at anywhere outside the quiet streets of the first world. Until you have been the victim of or witnessed true human evil, Hell seems like an uncomfortable, gross thing. The violence man inflicts upon other men, the real, honest horrors, have to be answered. You see, Hell is so perfectly compatible with God, because when we sin, it goes against everything that is good in the world; sin is pure evil, and only an apathetic God could refuse to punish it, refuse to get rid of it. Only a God without love could sit idly by and not punish sin. But the Christian God is very much a judge and a king and our lord, who loves his sheep dearly, who not only fights evil with his own hand, but uses it for the benefit of all. 
I will grant, you could say “Obviously no one sensible expects there to be absolutely no judgement or security from evils. But come on, we mean the big ones: genocide, murder, rape, et cetera. The stuff everyone agrees are true evil.” And of course therein lies the problem: we always want justice done for other people’s rebellions, not ours, because ours are, what? Lesser? By our own definition, of course. I have nothing for the person whose argument starts out implicitly with “I wish my morality were the morality,” for this person wishes to be God. 
Our detractor has the following to say: "Sure I guess that makes sense for sins that hurt other people. I may not agree that the punishment should be literally forever for murder, but I'll accept that it's his choice to do that. But what about things the Bible calls sinful that don't hurt anybody?" 
Humans, specifically in the modern West, have decided that so long as it does not harm or interfere with anyone else as far as we are aware, our conduct is in fact no one else's business. As William Ernest Henley declared, "I am the captain of my soul." In short, we imagine ourselves as wholly our own, able to do as we please, when we please.
But the God of Christianity doesn't accept that. The God of Christianity declares that he made creation, he made us, and has laid out his expectation for our conduct on his world. Don’t mistake me: I don’t mean he made up baseless house rules for our conduct along the lines of “shoes off please,” that are a nice to have, and mean he might have to mop when we leave. I mean the perfect goodness of his character is reflected in the ways he has established for his creations to act, and deviation from it results in less goodness in the world. This is an absolutely critical point: God’s laws and commands are not arbitrary, they are a reflection of his character and essential for the best possible functioning of creation. 
Consider the book of Numbers. We find within it whole entire sections about who is to take the tent down, who is to put it up, how the people are to be arranged, what gifts they should bring and when, what they should wear, and so on and so forth. If you don’t pay attention, this will, at best, sound very much like God is just trying to come up with easy or precise ways to separate his people’s culture from those around them, and he could’ve done it any which way. (This is the common explanation about pork and such. I will return to these expectations and their meaning for modern Christianity in a later chapter.) Not so! God was ordering everything about his people so that he could be close to them. So they could share in the divine presence! We also find an incredible richness of meaning within how it was all setup, to cause reflection and meditation upon God, his actions, and his promises. (Even the bread and its arrangement on the table was symbolic!)
It's ironic, the same people who say "Why didn't God just make us perfect so we didn't sin?" will very often in the same discussion with me say something along the lines of "I shouldn't be punished for disagreeing with God about this harmless thing that he doesn't like." They don't see the disconnect: God did make us with only good in us. We decided to use our position of having choice though for our own selfish ends. We continue to do so, by redefining what is acceptable or not. It is his right to define what perfection means, no? It is his right, and indeed that first question there properly makes the point: why should God tolerate an imperfect creation? By all rights, he should have seen us mess up, destroyed Adam and Eve, and started over. But he didn't. Through his mercy and grace, for his glory, each one of us has a lifelong opportunity to re-enter that union, in the wonderful garden.  
That all begins a further discussion on what some would call other-harmless sins. Hebrews 12:9-11 can start us off:
"Moreover, we have all had human fathers who disciplined us and we respected them for it. How much more should we submit to the Father of spirits and live! They disciplined us for a little while as they thought best; but God disciplines us for our good, in order that we may share in his holiness. No discipline seems pleasant at the time, but painful. Later on, however, it produces a harvest of righteousness and peace for those who have been trained by it."

God rebukes, and ultimately punishes, us for our sins because to not do so would allow the evil in us and the world to fester, and it would never be stopped. Consider two children being raised by parents. One child, when corrected or told to do this or that, refuses and throws violent meltdowns for a year in a row. Finally, the parents give up and stop asking the child to do much of anything beyond go to bed. This child grows up and encounters the real world, and fails, because they never learned essential childhood lessons from their parents. The other child, though they don’t want to do homework or chores, obeys with only typical complaint and disobedience. They grow up and function well in society. The discipline itself has value, though for the child it is certainly annoying at times. [][][][][][][][][]
Here’s another example from the Old Testament. In Numbers 15:32-36, we are told this story:
"While the Israelites were in the wilderness, a man was found gathering wood on the Sabbath day. Those who found him gathering wood brought him to Moses and Aaron and the whole assembly, and they kept him in custody, because it was not clear what should be done to him. Then the Lord said to Moses, 'The man must die. The whole assembly must stone him outside the camp.' So the assembly took him outside the camp and stoned him to death, as the Lord commanded Moses."

Do we think the man was killed because he was collecting wood, or do we think he was killed for violating God's command (from Exodus 31 concerning the Sabbath)? Obviously, for violating the command. It is reasonable that sin be punished for the evil it inevitably represents: however, it is righteous that sin be punished for it goes against God's sovereignty to disobey his commands. 
That example in Numbers is something we would call a "harmless" sin today, or even "minor." But this is the crux of the matter. We think first of the gathering of wood - God thinks first of the violation of his command. The man had violated God's command, and God had laid out the penalty for violating that command. What happens next is perfectly just: someone violated the command, and they received the punishment that they knew would be forthcoming. I mean come on, I have to explain this to my children. I mostly suspect people don’t like God’s application of the same process because they don’t respect God. 
	Regardless, this is what happens with every single sin. Every single sin you commit, no matter how harmless it may seem, is not just the evil act itself, but also the act of rebellion against the sovereignty of God - and he has duly warned us of the punishment for disobedience. I ask: is it fair for him to condemn our so-called other-harmless actions, when we lack the perspective to determine if they really are fully harmless, and they are against the will of a deity who owns us and the places we commit our sins in? Let me rephrase and repeat myself: what gives anyone the right to determine what the right punishment is, or for determining what actions deserve punishment in the first place, if there is a God?   Nothing, of course. Us deciding we don't like one of God's commands is us supplanting ourselves for him as judge and king. This disagreement is, as its most in our favor, a judgement call,   where any given choice is equally valid on the face. And if we are honest with ourselves, we know that an omniscient God would make better judgement calls than we do. 
As an American, I know how hotly unpopular that is with many of us in my own culture, and also in others. Subservience to someone else's will is not a popular thing here, especially when it comes to our bodies and the like. I don't intend to carry this further; a reasonable person will accept that if there is a God, he owns creation and us, and can decide what is acceptable conduct or not in his world.
After presenting this, though, I sometimes hear variations on the following: "It seems like a bit much to be sentenced to eternity in a lake of hellfire for say, refusing to stop masturbating."  I can see how this comment could be reached, but consider it through the lens I've hewn for us above: we're commanded to not look upon others with lust. So, when you undertake this sin, what are we doing? Are we merely giving ourselves a small pleasure? Or are we looking at God's command to us about lust, and saying, "no"? Of course the former seems small; because the issue at hand is not whether or not something is other-harmless. The issue at hand is whether or not we are disobeying God. He has no reason at all, remember, to tolerate our rebellion. He spoke the universe into existence, and he could just as easily speak disobedient creatures out of it. This is why all sin merits the same punishment,  for every sin is disobedience against the morality or will of God; this is the only justification one could reasonably provide. If there is no God, there is no such thing as evil. If there is a God, the only basis for what evil is, is what God decrees as evil is evil. Thus, since lust has been commanded against, masturbation (possibly outside mutual agreement by married partners) is evil and warrants the punishment he has set out for evil. Besides, it's not like we're doomed to face Hell. Jesus Christ is our way out. 
Moving along, I have been asked the following concerning Hell: "How come people in Hell aren't given a second chance? Much like humans who are forgiving to a fault, there are also humans who will keep giving other humans chances until they get it right." The question is really this: what if someone in Hell finds themselves deeply repentant and regretting the deeds of their life, and sees the error of their ways? 
The Catholics apparently ran into this problem, and invented purgatory. There is no Scriptural evidence for purgatory, mind, and it does not fit with the narrative presented in Scripture. In any case, Hebrews 9:27 tells us that "people are destined to die once, and after that to face judgment". I find it interesting that many refer to being in Hell as the "second chance," as if during life we only have one chance. 
What follows used to be a footnote, but I feel that Ezekiel gives us an excellent example for comparison for this "second chance" idea. I won't reproduce the entire chapter, but read this summary of the flow of events starting in Ezekiel chapter 20. Pay attention to the cyclic nature of things:
Verse 5, God promises Israel he is their God. 
Verse 6, he promises he will bring Israel out of Egypt into a land of milk and honey.
Verse 7, though, he gives them two commands that the promise is contingent upon.  
Verse 8, Israel rebels against God. Now, pay attention: in that same verse, God declares he will pour out his wrath against them, but then…
Verse 9, he forestalls that outpouring of wrath for his name, or glory. 
Verse 11, he gives them his laws and decrees so that those who obey may live by them and those who do not, will face judgement. 
Verse 13, man rebels again against God's laws and decrees. But we find that the "although the man who obeys them [God's decrees and laws] will live by them" bit repeats. 
	Skipping along, God says that he is going to punish Israel, their rebellion means they have not held up their end of the deal, and they will not enter the land of milk and honey. In verse 17 and a bit after, this is what God says:
"Yet I looked on them with pity and did not destroy them or put an end to them in the desert. I said to their children in the desert, 'Do not follow the statutes of your fathers or keep their laws or defile yourselves with their idols.'"

God then confirmed this agreement with the children of rebellious Israel once more, and entered into a new contract with the children. But literally the next verse, verse 21, they rebel! And God repeats that line: 
"although the man who obeys them [God's decrees and laws] will live by them"

I strongly recommend reading Ezekiel 20, it's an incredibly enlightening chapter in its entirety on the patience of the Lord. But you can see the pattern: God makes a covenant with a group of people, and they fail to uphold their end, barring individuals among them that succeeded. Those individuals are spared. The rest, though, have God's wrath poured out on them (or forestalled depending), and God makes a covenant with their children, and the cycle repeats ad infinitum. Ezekiel shows us that God, over and over, tried this "endless second chances" approach. And it wasn't working, at least, it wasn't bringing mankind any closer to full redemption.
Revelation 20:12-15 more specifically defines judgement: 
"And I saw the dead, great and small, standing before the throne, and books were opened. Another book was opened, which is the book of life. The dead were judged according to what they had done as recorded in the books. … and each person was judged according to what they had done. … Anyone whose name was not found written in the book of life was thrown into the lake of fire." 

Given what we know about sin and sinners, that all have transgressed against God, this then makes sense. Only those whose names are written in the book of life, having been saved by Christ, will survive. We can only get into the book of life… during life. Once you die, death has you, and life does not come from death. I sometimes hear it argued that "the Bible says that no one in Hell will want redemption," and they cite the example of the rich man and Lazarus as evidence. This is terrible evidence. Why? Because that's only one example first and second: just because the rich man didn't want redemption doesn't mean someone in Hell won't. I want to make this clear: the question is not "are there second chances in Hell?" The Bible is clear, the answer is no. Psalm 115:17: The dead do not praise the LORD, nor do any who go down into silence.”

 So it doesn't matter whether or not people want out of Hell; they certainly will. We're told there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth; what do you think they're crying about? The bitterness, the supposed unfairness, the if only. So! The proper question remains "why not? Why not give people another chance in Hell?" 
If you don't want to spend even the few living years you have with God… why exactly should he want to spend eternity with you? If you reject the offer of salvation, face judgement, and then decide you'd like to be free of the judgement… it's purely too late. God decreed that this life is the time we have to make the choice. Once you've been judged, you've been judged and your fate determined. While alive, we are more or less awaiting judgement. If you, in life, insist on doing things your way, disagree with how God wants us to run our lives… eventually God says, "okay, you get what you want: away from me, as you are so lost in your wickedness you can't see good for good. You have to live with the consequences of that decision, though. Thy will be done." 
People who argue with me about this, are really saying the following: "I do not think it's fair that God gives us a choice, and we have our entire lives to make it correctly, and tells us what's going to happen if we don't make the right decision, and then enforces those consequences on us." Further, and most damnably: "Assuming Hell is even real, I rather think I need to go there and experience it before I decide if I want to live with God forever." Or this: "I don't think Jesus was tortured and died for anything real. But if I find myself actually getting punished for what I've done, well then, that's a different story." 
Ah, but then they say it once more: "Well, if God were truly loving…" If he were indeed. It is baffling that these people talk of love when they tell God "I don’t think you’re even real, your son was tortured to death for nothing; and if not, I think it's fine that I need to experience the Hell he died for me to not have to go to firsthand before I decide if I think his death was worth it." That doesn't cut it. It is childish and irresponsible to believe we can escape all the consequences of our actions forever. A quote I am fond of is this: "We all make our choices, but in the end, our choices make us." In the end, where you choose to place your faith dictates where you go. If you place your faith with Christ, you go with Christ. If you place your faith with the world, in yourself, in self-help podcasts, in whatever idol… you go with them to the burning trash heap.
This viewpoint also drips with self-centeredness: if you go to Hell, creation will be happy to be rid of you. You and I are a cancer. I am evil, at my core. You are evil, at your core. Sin does not happen to sinners. Sinners create sin, happily, willingly, voluntarily. It is only through God that we can escape that fact. The central failure of man is in thinking himself good, even partly, and deserving of anything other than that which we earn through our sins. If I've said it once 've said it a dozen times; when someone says that God "would do it like this if he were real," they're not speaking about mercy; they're speaking about something they feel they or we are owed.
Hell, therefore, exists as eternal punishment for our sins against an eternal God. He decided it should be eternal, and there's no real argument as to why it shouldn't be that doesn't boil down to "I don't think it should be." Hell likewise benefits us directly, as it gives evil men pause, and means that evil can meet a final end. We are given this life to make sure we do not wind up there. 
I'll end this section with this long quote from Ezekiel 18 where God answers this very question:
"Yet you say, 'The way of the Lord is not just.' Hear, you Israelites: Is my way unjust? Is it not your ways that are unjust? If a righteous person turns from their righteousness and commits sin, they will die for it; because of the sin they have committed they will die. But if a wicked person turns away from the wickedness they have committed and does what is just and right, they will save their life. Because they consider all the offenses they have committed and turn away from them, that person will surely live; they will not die. Yet the Israelites say, 'The way of the Lord is not just.' Are my ways unjust, people of Israel? Is it not your ways that are unjust?
"Therefore, you Israelites, I will judge each of you according to your own ways, declares the Sovereign Lord. Repent! Turn away from all your offenses; then sin will not be your downfall. Rid yourselves of all the offenses you have committed, and get a new heart and a new spirit. Why will you die, people of Israel? For I take no pleasure in the death of anyone, declares the Sovereign Lord. Repent and live!"

	Numbers 14 is a final mirror for us. (I say mirror very explicitly.) Here are some sections woven together:
“Then all the congregation raised a loud cry, and the people wept that night. And all the people of Israel grumbled against Moses and Aaron. The whole congregation said to them, 'Would that we had died in the land of Egypt! Or would that we had died in this wilderness! Why is the LORD bringing us into this land, to fall by the sword? Our wives and our little ones will become a prey. Would it not be better for us to go back to Egypt?' And they said to one another, 'Let us choose a leader and go back to Egypt.'
	…said to all the congregation of the people of Israel, 'The land, which we passed through to spy it out, is an exceedingly good land. If the LORD delights in us, he will bring us into this land and give it to us, a land that flows with milk and honey. Only do not rebel against the LORD. And do not fear the people of the land, for they are bread for us. Their protection is removed from them, and the LORD is with us; do not fear them.'
	…truly, as I live, and as all the earth shall be filled with the glory of the LORD, none of the men who have seen my glory and my signs that I did in Egypt and in the wilderness, and yet have put me to the test these ten times and have not obeyed my voice, shall see the land that I swore to give to their fathers. And none of those who despised me shall see it. But my servant Caleb, because he has a different spirit and has followed me fully, I will bring into the land into which he went, and his descendants shall possess it.
	…'How long shall this wicked congregation grumble against me? I have heard the grumblings of the people of Israel, which they grumble against me. Say to them, 'As I live, declares the LORD, what you have said in my hearing I will do to you: your dead bodies shall fall in this wilderness, and of all your number … who have grumbled against me, not one shall come into the land where I swore that I would make you dwell, except [those who trusted me and/or did not give a false report]. But your little ones, who you said would become a prey, I will bring in, and they shall know the land that you have rejected. But as for you, your dead bodies shall fall in this wilderness. And your children shall be shepherds in the wilderness forty years and shall suffer for your faithlessness, until the last of your dead bodies lies in the wilderness.

	As you can see, the people didn’t trust God, they wanted to go back to their land of slavery and suffering, and so God commanded it be done. I said earlier that God finally says “thy will be done,” but this is not a wringing of the hands “I’m done with you.” This is a divine punishment for rejecting him. Each one of us, when we see the command of God we hate or don’t like and decide we want nothing to do with him if that’s what he thinks is good, turn back for Egypt (or stay there in the first place, such as the case may be.)

Special Article K concerns whether Hell is temporary or eternal, (hint: eternal), but what that leaves room for is this challenge I get fairly often at this point in the discussion: "Why does God punish all sins the same? Isn't it true that Christ said adultery and lust were the same level of heinous? That hate and murder were the same? That's pretty obviously false." 
	Right, so those are two references to the Sermon on the Mount given by Christ. Some draw the incorrect conclusion that lust and adultery and hate and murder are treated the same, but that's simply not what Christ said. Even in the Old Testament, many distinctions between different crimes were made. But to the point about Christ, he never stated "one is as bad as the other." Never. He was pointing out that sin is complex, sin is complicated, and here's the irony for this challenge, sin exists as a continuum. He was saying that you do not perfectly keep the command to not murder by simply refraining from caving your neighbor's skull in. Unjust hatred is on that spectrum, and it is a failure to follow the command. Picturing sexual acts with a woman who is not your wife is not sexual intercourse with her, but it is a failure to perfectly follow the command against adultery. 
	Let's say this, though: all sin deserves death. I've certainly said that enough times in this work! As it's said in Scripture, if you break the law at one point, you are a lawbreaker, which is the key point. The lawbreaker status is enough to deserve death. But human beings earn wrath by their lawbreaking. Revelation 14:9-10 says the following:
	"If anyone worships the beast and its image and receives a mark on his forehead or on his hand, he also will drink the wine of God's wrath, poured full strength into the cup of his anger, and he will be tormented with fire and sulfur in the presence of the holy angels and in the presence of the Lamb."

	Romans 2:5:
	"But because of your hard and impenitent heart you are storing up wrath for yourself on the day of wrath when God's righteous judgment will be revealed."

	Matthew 11:24:
	"But I tell you that it will be more tolerable on the day of judgment for the land of Sodom than for you."

	Each act of sin earns wrath, and if there is a conception of a full measure, there must be a partial measure as well. From these verses and others, it is fairly apparent that every sin is not weighted equally, and judgement will be exactly that: judgement. Here is one final sobering warning and notice from Christ, that every circumstance, that every possible variable will be considered in the judgement, from Matthew 12:36-37:
	"I tell you, on the day of judgment people will give account for every careless word they speak, for by your words you will be justified, and by your words you will be condemned."
 
That settles that, and up next used to be the chapter about Christ, prophecies concerning him, and the evidence for his life. However, I decided that narratively, it made more sense for the next chapter to be about the differences between the old covenant and the new. 
THE OLD COVENANT AND THE NEW

Time to change topics once again! I did in fact state one of my purposes was to check the internal consistency of the Biblical God. To that end, something I encounter a lot is that supposedly, God acts very differently in the New Testament versus the Old. Additionally, most Christians have no doubt heard some variation of, when declaring that Scripture says something is sinful, "Oh yeah? So then why do you wear fabric with different materials? That's in your Bible too! See, you're picking and choosing!" Now, trying to defend themselves, many Christians will at this point mumble some half-remembered defense about "categories of law" like ceremonial and moral, or perhaps lamely reply "That was for the Israelites only," but they'll fail to produce a convincing argument or even explain why at all. 
In this chapter, thus, I intend to explain the apparent discrepancies between what we see in the Old Testament and the New Testament requirements and law-wise. And no, it has nothing to do with three completely, one hundred percent made-up whole cloth "categories" of laws. This bothers me enough to say it at the outset: that argument is completely a-Scriptural! The law is never treated as anything but a whole entity in Scripture. Please do not use that argument! The real answer is fairly simple anyways, but because we're so used to thinking about this incorrectly, I have to go through it point by point. 
To say it succinctly, in Scripture, we find over and over that God makes covenants with men. Sometimes with individuals, sometimes with whole people groups, sometimes with every single human being. The two most important of these are those that generally cover the two Testaments. In the Old Testament, men were under the Law of Moses (the Ten Commandments, and all the rest). However, in the New Testament, we are under the new covenant of Christ. If a law has a parallel in the new covenant, we are obligated to follow it.  If not, then not. That's the deal. 
I'm going to let Paul do the talking for me first. From Galatians 5:
"Look: I, Paul, say to you that if you accept circumcision, Christ will be of no advantage to you. I testify again to every man who accepts circumcision that he is obligated to keep the whole law. You are severed from Christ, you who would be justified by the law; you have fallen away from grace."

	Galatians is essentially a righteous rant by Paul in defense of the gospel and the stupidity of trying to follow the law in light of the messianic hope. If you think, for one microsecond, when you correctly follow one of the Old Testament laws that it somehow contributes to your justification before the Lord, you have cosmically screwed up (so serious is this that Paul says he wishes the men advocating for circumcision would castrate themselves in Galatians), and as Paul further says, endangered your very relationship with Christ himself. So, tread carefully when thinking about the Law of Moses and its relationship to you.
The first thing I want to discuss about the Law of Moses, or the Mosaic Law, is how it handled forgiveness of sins. In the Mosaic Law, God gave painstakingly detailed instructions on how to be forgiven for sins, and to avoid paying the price for them. This was done in part by way of animal sacrifice. The animals given up to God were offered in place of the real sinner, however, this sacrifice could only ever be temporary and incomplete; people had to offer these sacrifices up frequently. 
When Jesus was killed, he became the ultimate, and final, sacrifice. Jesus can and does cover over any sin , fully and finally. The sacrifices of the Old Testament were not sufficient to fully solve the problem; all they did was cover over sin. In a word, they were reactive, not preventative. As in, these sacrifices never got at the root of the problem of sin. Think of it as if you have a rusty old water tank. Whenever it springs a new leak, you patch it. But it would be a better solution to instead replace the tank itself, yes? Explained another way, sacrificial offerings existed to cover the penalty of sin, yet sin dwelled in everyone in perpetuity. (Isaiah 1:11-20, though, reminds us that it is not and never was empty ritualism that covers sin.) 
How many times have we all heard of the scene where Jesus turned water into wine? Let's examine that a little bit more closely for a second. First, the story opens by John telling us it was the third day of a wedding (neither thing is a coincidence; consider all the wedding metaphors in Scripture and also the third day). Second, there were six stone jars for Jewish purification rites. I hope I don't need to smack you over the head with this one, at least not fully. To the ancient Israelites, seven represented perfect completeness; six represented incompleteness.  So immediately, a Jewish audience would be clued in here: how do we complete the picture? Christ is the seventh jar. Then, the jars were filled to the brim with water and he turned it into amazing wine. Going through John 2 is not the point of this section, but all that is to say, Christ was here showing us all that he offered a better washing than what was previously on offer through the old system. That is our starting point. John 1:29 tells us this:
"The next day John saw Jesus coming toward him and said, 'Look, the Lamb of God, who takes away the sin of the world!'"

We see here that Jesus can fully remove sin from us, a large advantage. This is something the Law and Old Testament sacrifices could never do. Next, examine Hebrews 7:18–19:
"The former regulation is set aside because it was weak and useless (for the law made nothing perfect), and a better hope is introduced, by which we draw near to God." 

These later verses in Hebrews 7 give us additional information:
"…but because Jesus lives forever, he has a permanent priesthood. Therefore he is able to save completely those who come to God through him, because he always lives to intercede for them. Such a high priest truly meets our need—one who is holy, blameless, pure, set apart from sinners, exalted above the heavens. Unlike the other high priests, he does not need to offer sacrifices day after day, first for his own sins, and then for the sins of the people. He sacrificed for their sins once for all when he offered himself. For the law appoints as high priests men in all their weakness; but the oath, which came after the law, appointed the Son, who has been made perfect forever."

This highlights a very important component of Jesus' priesthood: he was perfect, and therefore his sacrifice could be perfect. This is contrasted with sinful human high priests who had to first make themselves clean time and time again through sacrifice. The strict requirements of an animal without blemish, and priests similarly without blemish, given in Leviticus and elsewhere were to ensure that these stand-ins were as perfect as could be found in our fallen creation, but they were never even close to being actually perfect (remember that even Moses was denied as being good enough). Again in Hebrews 8 we have the following, that paint the picture nicely:
"But in fact the ministry Jesus has received is as superior to theirs [the Priests] as the covenant of which he is mediator is superior to the old one, since the new covenant is established on better promises. For if there had been nothing wrong with that first covenant, no place would have been sought for another."

Here are selected parts of Hebrews 8 (Paul quoting Jeremiah) so that you can see the narrative:
"God found fault with the people and said: The days are coming, declares the Lord, when I will make a new covenant with the people of Israel…because they did not remain faithful to my covenant, and I turned away from them…I will put my laws in their minds and write them on their hearts. I will be their God, and they will be my people. No longer will they teach their neighbor, or say to one another, 'Know the Lord,' because they will all know me, from the least of them to the greatest. For I will forgive their wickedness and will remember their sins no more."

Hebrews 8 ends with:
"By calling this covenant "new," he has made the first one obsolete; and what is obsolete and outdated will soon disappear."

However, this is the question, why was the old one obsolete? We're now into Hebrews 9:
"Now the first covenant had regulations for worship and also an earthly sanctuary…In its first room were the lampstand and the table with its consecrated bread; this was called the Holy Place. Behind the second curtain was a room called the Most Holy Place…the priests entered regularly into the outer room to carry on their ministry. But only the high priest entered the inner room, and that only once a year, and never without blood, which he offered for himself and for the sins the people had committed in ignorance. The Holy Spirit was showing by this that the way into the Most Holy Place had not yet been disclosed as long as the first tabernacle was still functioning. This is an illustration for the present time, indicating that the gifts and sacrifices being offered were not able to clear the conscience of the worshiper. They are only a matter of food and drink and various ceremonial washings—external regulations applying until the time of the new order."

There's a lot to unpack here, in these sections from both Hebrews 8 and 9. God says that he is going to replace this system with something new. Our sin and wickedness will be forgiven and gone. Right away we see that this is an improvement over the old, in that it is not merely covering our sins, it's removing them. This is made more clear in Hebrews 9. Remember, the 'earthly sanctuary' that's being talked about was the tabernacle, which was a sort of portable temple for the Lord. The priests had to enter following a very specific set of rules, or else they would be quite literally killed by entering. Hebrews 9 informs us that this is all to demonstrate that man has no real way to get close to God. These 'external regulations' could not cleanse your soul of sin, as is needed to approach God and not be burned up. Here is Hebrews 7:18-19 once more:
"The former regulation is set aside because it was weak and useless (for the law made nothing perfect), and a better hope is introduced, by which we draw near to God."

Do you see where this is going? When we are washed with the blood of Jesus, it is not just the outside of the body that is cleansed. Your spirit is washed as well, and a process of renewal begins that persists until you are brought fully into the company of God at the end. See here in Exodus 40:
"Moses could not enter the tent of meeting because the cloud had settled on it, and the glory of the Lord filled the tabernacle." 

Moses himself could not go into the tent while guilty, without the proper cleansing that is given in Leviticus as a pattern for the new covenant. More in Hebrews 9:
"But when Christ came as high priest of the good things that are now already here, he went through the greater and more perfect tabernacle that is not made with human hands, that is to say, is not a part of this creation. He did not enter by means of the blood of goats and calves; but he entered the Most Holy Place once for all by his own blood, thus obtaining eternal redemption. The blood of goats and bulls and the ashes of a heifer sprinkled on those who are ceremonially unclean sanctify them so that they are outwardly clean."

There's that word, sanctify. You are made outwardly holy so that you may approach the Most Holy Place. Note the word eternal here (still in Hebrews 9):
"How much more, then, will the blood of Christ, who through the eternal Spirit offered himself unblemished to God, cleanse our consciences from acts that lead to death, so that we may serve the living God! For this reason Christ is the mediator of a new covenant, that those who are called may receive the promised eternal inheritance—now that he has died as a ransom to set them free from the sins committed under the first covenant."

So that answers that. The Mosaic Law brought awareness to sin, and Christ brought salvation from it. From Colossians 2:13-14:
"And you, who were dead in your trespasses and the uncircumcision of your flesh, God made alive together with him, having forgiven us all our trespasses, by canceling the record of debt that stood against us with its legal demands. This he set aside, nailing it to the cross."

To repeat myself, the sacrifices of the Old Testament were not sufficient to fully solve the problem of sin; all they did was cover it over. Further, we were servants under the old covenant; but in the new, we are sons of God.  What difference does that make? For starters, we are no longer under the ten commandments as laid out in the Old Testament. Hold on! Before you toss this work on the trash heap for heresy, allow me to explain with the headline: we are under their equivalents in the New Testament. 
First, the Mosaic Law, as we saw in Hebrews, was in force until the New Covenant came to be. I want to make clear, immediately, that the Law is treated as a unit in both Testaments (said for those who say there are "categories" in the law). We are either under all of it or none of it; no provision is made in the New Testament for certain categories applying to us. So now I must argue fully for the position that the entirety of the Old Covenant has passed away, and to cling to part of it is to devalue the New Covenant. 
Jesus Christ was the fulfillment of the Old Testament law (Romans 10:4):
"Christ is the culmination of the law so that there may be righteousness for everyone who believes."

So, the Law was fulfilled, and Christians are not bound to it, since we are not ancient Israelites and have the New Covenant. There is no argument for keeping just part of it, as some people say. They go "ah but the moral components of the law still apply!" No they don't. Neither Jesus nor Paul nor anyone else with authority (of course Christ has more than the Apostles) says that any part of the law is in force on Christians. No one. "What about Matthew 5:17-20?" Comes next most often:
"Do not think that I have come to abolish the Law or the Prophets; I have not come to abolish them but to fulfill them. For truly, I say to you, until heaven and earth pass away, not an iota, not a dot, will pass from the Law until all is accomplished. Therefore whoever relaxes one of the least of these commandments and teaches others to do the same will be called least in the kingdom of heaven, but whoever does them and teaches them will be called great in the kingdom of heaven."

Much has been made of this paragraph. But remember Romans 10:4 above. We know Christ fulfilled the whole law perfectly (1 Peter 2:22, John 8:46). So, in order to figure this out, we need to understand what Jesus did, and in what context he did it. 
In Hebrews 9,  we had a section that describes how Jesus finally performed that which the first covenant was a symbol of. Next, though, in Hebrews 10, we see something remarkable:
"Therefore, when Christ came into the world, he said: 'Sacrifice and offering you did not desire, but a body you prepared for me; with burnt offerings and sin offerings you were not pleased. Then I said, 'Here I am—it is written about me in the scroll—I have come to do your will, my God.' ' First he said, 'Sacrifices and offerings, burnt offerings and sin offerings you did not desire, nor were you pleased with them' -though they were offered in accordance with the law. Then he said, 'Here I am, I have come to do your will.' He sets aside the first to establish the second. And by that will, we have been made holy through the sacrifice of the body of Jesus Christ once for all." 

See the culmination of this in Colossians 2:14:
"…having canceled the charge of our legal indebtedness, which stood against us and condemned us; he has taken it away, nailing it to the cross."

And see these verses here, Ephesians 2:15 and then Galatians 3:23-25:
"by setting aside in his flesh the law with its commands and regulations. His purpose was to create in himself one new humanity out of the two, thus making peace," 

"Before the coming of this faith, we were held in custody under the law, locked up until the faith that was to come would be revealed. So the law was our guardian until Christ came that we might be justified by faith. Now that this faith has come, we are no longer under a guardian." 

If the law still had hold of us, it wouldn't have been fulfilled. If it still bound us, then Jesus' sacrifice was not enough. Why? See Galatians 2:16:
"know that a person is not justified by the works of the law, but by faith in Jesus Christ. So we, too, have put our faith in Christ Jesus that we may be justified by faith in Christ and not by the works of the law, because by the works of the law no one will be justified."

We are fully capable of being justified, made righteous, not just having our sins covered under a new covenant. And remember, the whole law was fulfilled. It is not a separable thing. But what does Scripture call this new covenant? Galatians 6:2:
"Carry each other's burdens, and in this way you will fulfill the law of Christ."

With the end of the Mosaic Law of the old covenant, Jesus established a new one, which was predicted by the prophets (among them Moses, Jeremiah, and Ezekiel).  Now here is Jesus himself describing the new covenant in Luke 22:20:
"In the same way, after the supper he took the cup, saying, 'This cup is the new covenant in my blood, which is poured out for you."

See Romans 6:14-18:
"For sin shall no longer be your master, because you are not under the law, but under grace. What then? Shall we sin because we are not under the law but under grace? By no means! Don't you know that when you offer yourselves to someone as obedient slaves, you are slaves of the one you obey—whether you are slaves to sin, which leads to death, or to obedience, which leads to righteousness? But thanks be to God that, though you used to be slaves to sin, you have come to obey from your heart the pattern of teaching that has now claimed your allegiance. You have been set free from sin and have become slaves to righteousness."

So what is the "pattern of teaching that has now claimed your allegiance?" James 1:25:
"But the one who looks into the perfect law, the law of liberty, and perseveres, being no hearer who forgets but a doer who acts, he will be blessed in his doing."

And James again uses this phrase in James 2:12:
"Speak and act as those who are going to be judged by the law that gives freedom,"

Paul also calls it the 'law' in Romans 3:27:
"Where, then, is boasting? It is excluded. Because of what law? The law that requires works? No, because of the law that requires faith."

So, what is this law of liberty, that gives freedom, that requires faith, not works (that is called the law of Christ)? How does it relate to the New Covenant? Galatians chapter 3 is in its entirety a wealth of information, but it specifically deals with the difference between the Old Covenant and the New; here are some select verses from it (I summarize afterwards):
"Let me ask you only this: Did you receive the Spirit by works of the law or by hearing with faith? Are you so foolish? Having begun by the Spirit [been saved by Christ], are you now being perfected by the flesh [the old covenant]? … Does he who supplies the Spirit to you and works miracles among you do so by works of the law, or by hearing with faith— just as Abraham "believed God, and it was counted to him as righteousness"? 
"Christ redeemed us from the curse of the law by becoming a curse for us—for it is written, "Cursed is everyone who is hanged on a tree"— so that in Christ Jesus the blessing of Abraham might come to the Gentiles, so that we might receive the promised Spirit through faith. …
"This is what I mean: the law, which came 430 years afterward, does not annul a covenant previously ratified by God, so as to make the promise void. For if the inheritance comes by the law, it no longer comes by promise; but God gave it to Abraham by a promise. … Why then the law? It was added because of transgressions, until the offspring should come to whom the promise had been made … Is the law then contrary to the promises of God? Certainly not! For if a law had been given that could give life, then righteousness would indeed be by the law. But the Scripture imprisoned everything under sin, so that the promise by faith in Jesus Christ might be given to those who believe.
"Now before faith came, we were held captive under the law, imprisoned until the coming faith would be revealed. So then, the law was our guardian until Christ came, in order that we might be justified by faith. But now that faith has come, we are no longer under a guardian, for in Christ Jesus you are all sons of God, through faith."

1. Abraham's offspring (singular), Christ, blesses the faithful in order for us to receive the spirit.
2. The law had a purpose as an intermediary before the promise to Abraham was fully given. It would serve its function until the promise was brought to fruition.
So, you see, that is the explanation for both Matthew 5:17-20, and the law of liberty. The law of liberty, or faith, separates us from the law God's people were held captive under. It does not destroy it or nullify it or make it obsolete, but we are simply removed from it and placed under the promise, which is the New Covenant. The law does not go away: we are just not beholden to it. They sound similar, but they are not. The law rules over the realm of the flesh, but we are in the spirit (Romans 8:9).
The law of liberty releases us from the death sentence of the law, that brings condemnation and sin. We died to the (Mosaic) law, this is the lesson. We are dead to the law (Romans 7:4), and belong to Christ. We are released from the bonds of sin in order to live like Christ, and follow the 'summation' of the law in the two commands Jesus used to sum it up (Matthew 22:37-40):
"And he said to him, "You shall love the Lord your God with all your heart and with all your soul and with all your mind. This is the great and first commandment. And a second is like it: You shall love your neighbor as yourself. On these two commandments depend all the Law and the Prophets." 

Faith in God and love for all. Simpler, yet so much more demanding. Thankfully, we have the Holy Spirit to bring us closer to God and to more closely conform to this perfect image. Of course, Jesus took the time in his other sermons to get into specifics, but I won't re-iterate the whole New Testament.
So to come back around to the initial bold claim I made, of the Ten Commandments, nine of them (sans the one concerning the sabbath) have an equivalent law under the New Covenant. Christ laid them out. He lists the second tablet in Mark 10, to the young rich man. Paul as well, in Romans 13:8-9, lists the first tablet (except the sabbath). You see, Jesus said none of the law went away; and they didn't. It has been transformed into the New Covenant.
Also, with regards to the Sabbath, ironically enough (almost as if God knew what he was doing and covered all his bases, clearing up how we should treat the Sabbath, even) Paul says this in Romans 14:5:
"One person considers one day more sacred than another; another considers every day alike. Each of them should be fully convinced in their own mind."

"But I'm still confused. What about wearing mixed fabric clothing and laws like that? Didn't Jesus say nothing will leave the law?" I am the person asking that this time, and indeed even after reading the above, I asked that for a long time, and it took me a while to get the answer, but it's actually made plain by what I wrote above. Note that none of the individual commands of the Old Testament law apply to those under Christ. Not a one. Many have equivalents, but the original, even if worded exactly the same, is not over you. 
Does that make sense? We aren't bound by the code of the Israel of the flesh, because we aren't part of that Israel. We're a new, spiritual Israel made up of believers from every nation. My problem, and perhaps your problem if you saw that final question about multi-colored fabric and didn't know how to answer it based on the Scripture above, is that by focusing on the fact that nothing will leave the law, you're missing where he said he fulfills it. The law will not change, but he fulfilled it. Read the Scripture I quote above. It all says Christ fulfilled the law, that we are no longer under it. No command of the Old Covenant has force over you, but many have equals in the New Covenant. I must sound like a broken record, but this is a huge misunderstanding in modern Christianity. Neither Christ nor the Apostles ever mention anything about multi-colored fabric, so we are good! 
I hope that clears it up. It can be confusing. Follow Christ's example, be the servant of Christ, a Son (in the meaning of heir) of God, not of sin. He never rebuked anyone for what they wore, and he declared all food clean (Romans 14:20). Matthew 12:1-13 is a good example of interpreting the Law, when reading it for guidance as those unbound by it, through the lens of Christ. In this story, Christ's disciples ate heads of grain on the Sabbath; forbidden under the Old Covenant. In the Markian version of the story, Christ says: "The Sabbath was made for man, not man for the Sabbath."

In response to accusations concerning the matter, Christ referenced the example of David in the Old Testament, who when he needed food, took special bread intended only for consumption by the priests; David had not been sinful, and neither were Christ's disciples being sinful. Christ then goes on to heal a man on the Sabbath, and he tells everyone that it is lawful to do good on the Sabbath. So, Christ was not against the Law, he was against the crushing burden the Pharisees had turned much of it into.
Galatians 5:14:
"For the entire law is fulfilled in keeping this one command: 'Love your neighbor as yourself.'"

In sum, we see that at Christ's resurrection, the new covenant was now fully in place and the old fulfilled. After this, I used to have a section below that described the behavioral expectations under the Old Covenant and the New, but given that this work is the product of years of effort, I have matured in my understanding of Scripture from draft to draft, and I no longer see that view as accurate. What view? That God had different behavioral expectations for us under the Law. You see, as I argue elsewhere in this book, the way God saves a man from himself has never changed. It has always been by faith, either general or specific depending on when you live, but the core has been the same. In the removed text, I rather lengthily argued that under the Old Covenant, you were expected to tithe 10%, and now there was this expectation of generosity that could mean you should give a lot more than 10%, or less, depending on this or that. 
I will grant, I made a good point: we don't have to tithe by command, 2 Corinthians 9:
" Each of you should give what you have decided in your heart to give, not reluctantly or under compulsion, for God loves a cheerful giver… As it is written: 'They have freely scattered their gifts to the poor; their righteousness endures forever.'"

And again I was right when I said "If you're only giving out of a compulsion, then you aren't doing it for the right reasons; God is after our hearts, not compelled actions." But I was wrong when I implied God had ever desired nothing more than external adherence to his commands. If you look in the Old Testament, in the true men of God, you find generosity of the kind God has always been truly after. True, the substance is somewhat different from old to new, but so it is with specific versus general revelation. I imagine if Christ read my draft he would have words awfully similar to what he told Nicodemus for me, concerning this matter in particular. 
Why am I saying all of this? Because God is consistent, despite his revelation being successional. I have stared these verses in the face all of my life, and never until the moment I was re-thinking this, had the true meaning of it all dawn on me. Matthew 22:36-40:
"'Teacher, which is the greatest commandment in the Law?' Jesus replied: 'Love the Lord your God with all your heart and with all your soul and with all your mind.' This is the first and greatest commandment. And the second is like it: 'Love your neighbor as yourself.' All the Law and the Prophets hang on these two commandments.'"

How did Christ fulfill the law? Perfect obedience, yes, but moreover, perfect love. John 3:16:
"For God so loved the world, that he gave his only Son, that whoever believes in him should not perish but have eternal life."

Again, as his revelation is successional, certain parts are different. Such is a time-bounded universe. But the God behind it, the meaning, the purpose, the intent behind it, has never wavered from sacrificial love for others. "Did God ever mention this coming covenant in the Old Testament?"
How glad I am that you asked! Folks, if you haven't read the prophets with a keen eye, really, seriously, throw this book down and go do it. Isaiah 42:6, discussing The Servant: 
"I will give you as a covenant for the people,"

Jeremiah 31:33:
"Behold, the days are coming, declares the Lord, when I will make a new covenant with the house of Israel and the house of Judah,"

So, rather easily, yes, it was mentioned.
	Here, an atheist friend of mine, though somewhat versed in the Bible, asked: "So God didn't give us the final system, the New Covenant in Old Testament times, 'because our hearts were hard', but since God is the one softening or hardening our hearts, why didn't he just soften our hearts to make it so we could accept the New Covenant's greater moral demands?" 
	The first thing I'll do is quote from Judges 2:1-3:
"And he said, 'I brought you up from Egypt and brought you into the land that I swore to give to your fathers. I said, 'I will never break my covenant with you, and you shall make no covenant with the inhabitants of this land; you shall break down their altars.' But you have not obeyed my voice. What is this you have done? So now I say, I will not drive them out before you, but they shall become thorns in your sides, and their gods shall be a snare to you.'"

Partly because God is merciful to who he wishes to be (Romans 9:15), and being part of God's covenant is a privilege, a benefit. Being part of his household is not exactly cast as a reward, but it is the same sentiment: it's a bonus God gives when and where he chooses. Being good is to have some of God, and he chooses who he builds his temple with. See this from Isaiah 6:10-11, a pronouncement against the proud and haughty:
"Make the heart of this people dull, and their ears heavy, and blind their eyes; lest they see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand with their hearts, and turn and be healed."

Don't forget that we deserve to be our evil selves, never capable of godly joy. Thus, what is really being asked is "Why didn't God give us more mercy than he already had?" Because that was not his wish, and as an unearned gift, we cannot demand more. Put another way, being good is better and more enjoyable than being bad, thus being evil is its own punishment and the good of God is not guaranteed or owed to anyone who is not of his household. 
So ends the specific example of generosity in comparing the differences between the expectations of the Old Covenant and the New. You see, the New Covenant is much stricter despite not being given to us in axiomatic form. Christ told us to be 'perfect', in order to fulfill it, and yet we cannot; we cannot attain sinless perfection, we won't reach that until we're with God (1 John 3:2):
"Beloved, we are God's children now, and what we will be has not yet appeared; but we know that when he appears we shall be like him, because we shall see him as he is." 

"Woah okay, you lost me there," said someone. "We were discussing the different in behavior between God in the Old Testament and the New at the outset of this chapter. I understand that you've explained the evolution of God's relationship with us as a way to make some of that go away, but I'm not convinced. It still seems like there's a big gap in behavior from him in the Old Testament and the New. Again, you showed us that yes, his relationship with us has changed by specific revelation, but that he always demanded the same things from us, but nothing else. In the Old Testament, God's love takes a backseat, and in the New Testament, his wrath takes a backseat. It's like he had a personality change."
	Earlier in this book, I explained at some length how God's wrath is to our benefit, and often for our defense, so I don't feel the need to rehash that argument. I will thus advance with the notion that this discussion is not about whether God's wrath is justified, but why it seems he was more wrathful in the Old Testament than in the New. 
	The first point I will make is this. One, around 70 A.D., Jerusalem was… I don't even know what string of words to use to describe what Rome did to Jerusalem, imagine walking in your hometown after an army had levelled it, slaughtered its inhabitants. What words would you use? Jesus predicted this catastrophe, though, and declared it was a judgement of God. That's the first thing; God did not stop judging the nations or Israel. Second, God mocked, beat, tortured, crucified, and killed his own son. One could hardly call that an act lacking in wrath. Revelation 14 says this: "If anyone worships the beast and its image and receives a mark on his forehead or on his hand, he also will drink the wine of God's wrath, poured full strength into the cup of his anger, and he will be tormented with fire and sulfur in the presence of the holy angels and in the presence of the Lamb. And the smoke of their torment goes up forever and ever, and they have no rest, day or night, these worshipers of the beast and its image, and whoever receives the mark of its name."

	Whether or not you accept my formerly stated hypothesis that much of Revelation concerns the events of 70 AD, you will regardless accept that this is from the New Testament, and it depicts no small measure of divine anger intended for the non-Old Testament time period. Finally, Christ the son of God himself gave us vivid depictions of Hell, more intense than those in the Old Testament, and gave grave warnings of it. Hell is the full measure of God's wrath, so this is also a point of consistency between the "level of wrath" displayed by him in both. So! I will quickly conclude that God's wrath is present in both the Old and New Testaments. (I surely do not need to remind you of the various incidents of his wrath depicted in the Old.)
	What that leaves, though, is the presence of God's love in the Old Testament. Do we see it in equal measure? It is undoubtedly true that his greatest act of love for us was the sacrifice of his Son, but the body of this work has explained that God intended for that event to occur some time after our fall, so that's not particularly relevant. Certain parts of Scripture are intended to explain certain things about God. It is a teaching, revelatory work after all, so because one small section here or there depicts more wrath than love is hardly noteworthy. No, what's meant here is this: "Did God's philosophy become more loving, more patient, in the New Testament?" 
	One detractor in reading this far reached immediately for the welcoming of foreigners in the New Testament, but I pointed them to the abundant protections given foreigners among the Israelites in the Old. Further, verses like Genesis 22:18 show us that God always had an eye for all mankind though the Jews were chosen for the Messiah's bloodline: 
"and in your offspring shall all the nations of the earth be blessed, because you have obeyed my voice."

	 I don't feel a need to re-display God's patience with us in the Old Testament, this was done in detail by examples in Ezekiel earlier in this work. Second, implicitly, so, where is his love then? I'll remind you of the Scriptural definition of love, found in 1 Corinthians 13:4-8:
"Love is patient and kind; love does not envy or boast; it is not arrogant or rude. It does not insist on its own way ; it is not irritable or resentful; it does not rejoice at wrongdoing, but rejoices with the truth. Love bears all things, believes all things, hopes all things, endures all things ."

	As I've said before, if you offer up another definition of love, I will shrug my shoulders and tell you to argue with someone who uses that definition of love. Now let's see God's love in the Old Testament. I'll be cheeky and start with the fact that there even is an Old Testament, given that as I have said many times, we should all be whooshed into Hell right this very moment before we finish blinking, but he wants us to repent, so he forestalls his justice. Mercy is an act of love.
However, I can be more specific, and so I shall. I've talked a great deal about the Exodus in this work, so I will only remind you that it occurred, and that it was a great, real, physical demonstration of God's love as he fought for and defended the Israelites from the Egyptians to bring them out of slavery. 
	Jonah 2:2, when Jonah was inside the belly of the great fish:
	"In my distress I called to the LORD, and He answered me. From the depths of the grave I called for help, and you listened to my cry."

	Jonah 3:10, after the people and king of Nineveh repented and relented and asked God for mercy:
	"When God saw what they did and how they turned from their evil ways, He had compassion and did not bring upon them the destruction he had threatened."

	I have chosen Jonah first particularly because Christ references Jonah.  I think something often forgotten when going through Jonah, is that the whole time Jonah is running from God, and God is being abundantly patient with Jonah… he's also being abundantly patient with Nineveh. He wants to show them the truth, he wants them to repent, and he teaches Jonah something at the same time.
Next I'll go to the book of Judges, which details the history of some of Israel's worst leaders. I mean these guys were just not good: violent, arrogant, foolish, promiscuous… take your pick, really. But God always delivered his people from their idiocy and flagrant disobedience. See a bit from Judges 2:
"Then the Lord raised up judges, who saved them out of the hand of those who plundered them. Yet they did not listen to their judges, for they whored after other gods and bowed down to them. They soon turned aside from the way in which their fathers had walked, who had obeyed the commandments of the Lord, and they did not do so. Whenever the Lord raised up judges for them, the Lord was with the judge, and he saved them from the hand of their enemies all the days of the judge. For the Lord was moved to pity by their groaning because of those who afflicted and oppressed them."

	God always pursued Israel. He always had prophets guiding her, men at arms to defend her, until it simply became too much. He sought after her all day. Isaiah 65 is a chapter full of God's love, here are some verses from it:
	"I was ready to be sought by those who did not ask for me; I was ready to be found by those who did not seek me. I said, 'Here I am, here I am,'"

	In the latter parts of the chapter, verses 17-25, God promises a new heaven and a new earth to those who return his love, that will be peace and light and joy. He promises an image  of the same to those who serve him in this life, too, in verses 13-16. These promises are from his love, and bear an exactness of resemblance to those we find in the New Testament.
	Frankly, I think those who say "God's character changes from the Old Testament to the New Testament," have never bothered to read much of either, or if they have, they have not actually comprehended the text in anything but passing detail… I am reminded of a poem:

I met a seer.
He held in his hands
The book of wisdom.
"Sir," I addressed him,
"Let me read."
"Child-" he began.
"Sir," I said,
"Think not that I am a child,
For already I know much
Of that which you hold.
Aye, much."
He smiled.
Then he opened the book
And held it before me.-
Strange that I should have grown so suddenly blind.
Stephen Crane, The Black Riders and other Lines, XXXVI

As I said, certain passages magnify certain aspects of God's character. But he is always there in fullness, as these examples and many others I could offer demonstrate of his love and dutiful attention to those he loves in the Old Testament. But before I close this chapter, let's end with a bit of a dialogue of sorts that's the distilled essence of questions I get right about now when I bring this up in debates:
"But God is saving us from himself, no? Seems ridiculous to call that love or mercy. Here let me tell you deserve a beating and then tell you 'I'll let you off this time'; what a manipulative bully your God is." Ironically enough, an atheist friend of mine gave me part of my response here; he said, paraphrasing, "All relationships are conditional, that's what makes it a relationship. You don't get to just take take take from someone forever or dictate top down all the time." All love is mutual, conditional. Imagine a human relationship where one spouse got to do whatever, whenever, even though the other hated some of those things; that is not a healthy relationship. So that's part of it. 
We have a relationship with the Christian God; all of us, every individual, because we live in his creation.  God wants it to be a loving relationship according to his divine (i.e. better than mortal) definition of love; from how much he pursues us and that definition above, and what he promises and has given us (the garden, heaven, not to mention a personal relationship with God, the guy who makes stars) I'd hardly call that manipulative. He promises us purpose, a family, joy, a home. Everything. "But where exactly do we get to put our wants and desires into this? You said all love is two-way, so where's our way?" This is where him being God and the 'Father' in the sense of head of household colors the relationship. A romantic human relationship really isn't a facsimile for the God-human one. For one, he's God so he demonstrably knows better than us what's good for us. Two, he does listen to us, through prayer and the like. 
"But he threatens us with hell, and forces us to follow his commands to get those rewards. You're ignoring all of that. What if I don't want those rewards from him? This still sounds manipulative and like bullying." He is the head of household, the owner of us all, and he sets the rules and the punishment for breaking them. I discussed that at length in the chapter on evil and sin; I won't rehash it. Also, forces us? Then hell would be empty. Second, Christ's gift of salvation is freely given from his love, and predicated upon faith, not following commands perfectly; legalism and trying to follow them perfectly is a death sentence, so this statement is incorrect at the outset. Yes, you're expected to hate your evil and work to get rid of it, but… ok? Got me there. 
If you have some behaviors you hold so dear that you think hell is worth keeping them, that you disagree Christ needed to die for… then so be it, but you can't say God didn't made it pretty hard to go there. Again I have been over this in the chapter on evil and sin, but God cares about us, and he knows anything that isn't his goodness is harmful to us. (I am reiterating this and not only pointing you to previous chapters is because the focus here is on how God is loving in this, not simply justified; the justification was handled in previous chapters.)
"It sounds in these responses like you're implying God has some personal right to toss us in hell for failing to keep up our end of a relationship. Like our sin harms God in some way. How does it? How does he have a right to toss me in hell when I have not and cannot hurt him?" Creation is his, yes? He made it, it's his. Imagine if you had just built a sand castle on the beach that you loved, it was your pride and joy. Now, some other kid walks up and starts stomping on it; you have the right to prevent that. Or imagine it's your child someone is harming. 
We don't hurt God, we hurt ourselves and creation. This is more evidence that God cares for us, since while not personally harmed, he is personally invested. This one is kind of asking, "Why would you care if I walked in your house covered in vomit? Sat on your couch?" If you died right now in your sin, the universe would clap and celebrate being rid of your evil.  God doesn't want you to be infested by sin, and he won't let you kick over his sand castle or harm his children endlessly. 
If you disagree that you're infested by sin, covered in vomit, he has every right to toss you out of his house. But he says "you're covered in vomit, here come in and take a shower," and all you have to do is… believe you're covered in vomit and need his shower to get clean.  That's love, but love is a two way street. I rather find it the person asking these questions to be the manipulative one, frankly, framed as a statement to God a bit excessively to make my point: "Sure you offer me all of that , and you don't want me to hurt myself or others, but you know what? I don't care. I'm going to ignore everything you say, call you an idiot and a liar for saying my actions are bad, come in your house covered in vomit and sit on your furniture, and then I'll be upset, mad, and call you evil when you toss me out after I refuse to take a shower and get clean." Right, God's the one being an unloving, manipulative bully here.  Here is an excerpt from Micah 6 on this issue:
"for the Lord has an indictment against his people, and he will contend with Israel. 'O my people, what have I done to you? How have I wearied you? Answer me! For I brought you up from the land of Egypt and redeemed you from the house of slavery,' …  'With what shall I come before the Lord, and bow myself before God on high? Shall I give my firstborn for my transgression, the fruit of my body for the sin of my soul?' He has told you, O man, what is good; and what does the Lord require of you
but to do justice, and to love kindness, and to walk humbly with your God?"

	God tells us that he has done much for us, and there's nothing we can offer in return as a gift he wants; not even the ultimate gift we can offer, a child. (Verses left out mention ten thousand rivers of oil, that sort of thing, as well.) He tells us what he wants from us, and it's really not much, and it's really not bad for us. And Micah 7:
"Who is a God like you, pardoning iniquity and passing over transgression for the remnant of his inheritance? He does not retain his anger forever, because he delights in steadfast love. He will again have compassion on us; he will tread our iniquities underfoot. You will cast all our sins into the depths of the sea. You will show faithfulness to Jacob and steadfast love to Abraham, as you have sworn to our fathers from the days of old."

I digress, though. That wraps up this two-chapter narrative of the nature of the Christian God's relationship with a fallen creation. Up next is a slight shift in topic, to the defense of the single most important thing in Scripture: the life, death, and resurrection of Christ. 
THE PRINCIPLE OF AND EVIDENCE FOR CHRIST
	

The much maligned and misunderstood conversation between Thomas and Jesus, from John 20:24-31:
"Now Thomas, one of the twelve, called the Twin, was not with them when Jesus came. So the other disciples told him, 'We have seen the Lord.' But he said to them, 'Unless I see in his hands the mark of the nails, and place my finger into the mark of the nails, and place my hand into his side, I will never believe.' Eight days later, his disciples were inside again, and Thomas was with them. Although the doors were locked, Jesus came and stood among them and said, 'Peace be with you.' Then he said to Thomas, 'Put your finger here, and see my hands; and put out your hand, and place it in my side. Do not disbelieve, but believe.' Thomas answered him, 'My Lord and my God!' Jesus said to him, 'Have you believed because you have seen me? Blessed are those who have not seen and yet have believed.'"

The detractor says: "That passage always sort of rubbed me the wrong way, even as a kid. 'Blessed are those who believe blindly and aren’t critical, and screw you for demanding evidence,' it’s really not the best message to put out there."
But that's not what Jesus meant. He was saying it's commendable that the other Apostles believed the promises Christ had made and accepted his return. Thomas did not believe those promises ("I'll never believe"). 1 Peter 1:8–9:
"Though you have not seen him, you love him. Though you do not now see him, you believe in him and rejoice with joy that is inexpressible and filled with glory, obtaining the outcome of your faith, the salvation of your souls."

People misrepresent Thomas, they misrepresent the people who misrepresent Thomas… but more importantly, they also completely misrepresent Christ's response. 

I have discussed in large part the whole narrative and motive of God in Scripture, and covered the why of Christ. But I have not defended the evidence for Christ himself, for his existence, crucifixion, and resurrection. It's time to discuss this most important subject. After all, if Christ did not exist, if Christ did not die as described, if Christ was not raised as described, we are hopeless fools, worthy of nothing but pity.  I should add that this chapter is a different color than the others. This chapter weaves many things, from geology to calendar studies to ancient letters together for one purpose: to showcase the evidence for Jesus Christ and his resurrection. This book used to have a chapter or two dedicated to archeology and the like for the Old Testament, but I have since removed them because in actuality, there is but one event we need to be certain happened. That is the betrayal, murder, and resurrection of Jesus Christ. 
Additionally, I have been asked many times how it is that someone can pick from the multitude of gods and religions that exist in the world. Ignoring for the moment the many, many pantheons that can be eliminated by observation (the mere fact that nothing drags the Sun across the sky invalidates a tremendous number of them), I reply that this is actually asking the wrong question. One needn't disprove all of them but one - instead, you only need to prove one religion as correct for all the others to necessarily be false, so long, of course, as that religion's truth falsifies all others. 
One primary defense of Christianity's truth is prophesy. If there was a prophecy in Scripture that was so exact, and so precise, as to not be possibly human-created or randomly correct, that then came true, that would be an incredible piece of evidence for God's existence.
	One contender for such a prophecy is that the book of Daniel predicts the exact month Jesus would be killed. Let's get this straight: modern critical scholars, in an effort to avoid Daniel's uncomfortably accurate predictions about Alexander the Great, despite the author's intimate knowledge of Babylonian courts, have dated Daniel to at least hundreds of years prior to Jesus even being born. We have copies from at least then as well, so there is no claiming that Daniel's prophecy was delivered after the fact for this.  
Daniel 9:25-26 is where we find the prophecy. It says (in the NIV, for the ESV makes an interpretive “translation” here and calls the ‘sevens’ ‘weeks’ – more on that in a little bit): “’Know and understand this: From the time the word [command] goes out [is given] to restore and rebuild Jerusalem until the Anointed One, the ruler, comes, there will be seven ‘sevens,’ and sixty-two ‘sevens.’ It will be rebuilt with streets and a trench, but in times of trouble. After the sixty-two ‘sevens,’ the Anointed One will be put to death and will have nothing…”


So let's do the math on that: first, it says "Seven sevens plus sixty-two sevens" will pass from the time the command is given to rebuild Jerusalem until the Messiah dies. So that's 49 (7 times 7) plus 434 (62 times 7) equals 483 years.  
483 years though is just a number of years; we need a “from when.” Fortunately, we’re told when to start the  countdown: when the command is given to rebuild Jerusalem. Nehemiah 2:1-6 states that King Artaxerxes of Persia gave the order in his "twentieth year", which was 445 BC, in "the month of Nisan" (the Hebrew month corresponding to our March and/or April). “Ok,” you say, “but why then? Couldn't this be referring to any number of times and Nehemiah doesn't exclusively apply?” In short, no. Jerusalem was only destroyed once before 70 A.D., and that's why Daniel was in Babylon to begin with. See 2 Kings 25:8–10 (or really, the whole chapter) for the relevant section detailing the destruction. That's how we know which instance Daniel is talking about: he's talking about his own experience of a destroyed Jerusalem, and it only happened the one time in the Old Testament. So this calculation isn't being done with moving targets that are lined up to make the math work out a certain way; there was one destruction of Jerusalem, and one command to rebuild it. It has been attacked and fought over, by my count, about five times in the Old Testament record; but only once was it destroyed. I'll say it again, that one destruction was why Daniel was an exile, and that was the destruction he was talking about in his work. So not only was there only one destruction, it had specific relevance to Daniel. Alright, so we can reasonably give our start date for the 483 years: 445 BC. 
Further, how do I know "sevens" are years? The same word is used here in Genesis 29:27-28 (word italicized):
"'…Complete the week of this one, and we will give you the other also in return for serving me another seven years.' Jacob did so, and completed her week."

This is part of the story of Jacob, who had served Laban seven years to earn Rachel, but was deceived and given Leah instead. Note that Laban said 'another seven years,' and then it is called her 'week,' and uses the same exact Hebrew word (italicized) as Daniel does in the prophecy. Thus, it can refer to years.  
So, knowing this, we can calculate exactly when it's saying the Messiah would die. From the command being given to rebuild Jerusalem to the death of the Messiah is 483 years. 483 years after 445 BC would get us 38 AD, but we need to convert the date, as the calendar Daniel was using was slightly different from ours.
Our calendar has 365.25 days, while the Babylonian one Daniel was using had 360 days. Daniel was a high-ranking Babylonian administrator and prophet. For administrative and prophetic purposes, the Babylonians used a 360 day calendar. Babylonian documents illustrate this clearly.  According to David Brown , in Babylon "A period of 360 days, comprising 12 months of 30 days each…was used extensively in administrative circles".
His paper notes how this can be seen in a variety of Babylonian documents; for example, it talks about a work order for 36 female workers to work for 12 years, totaling 12960 days. So 12960/36 = 360 days for each worker's year of work. And there is another order for 720 daily grain rations for 24 months, which would be for two years of 360-day years. Since Babylonian prophecy and Babylonian administrators used a 360 day year, we can be sure that this is what a Babylonian administrator like Daniel giving a prophecy would be using.
Going back to the calculations, 360 days in the year times 483 years is 173,880 days. Using our number of days, 365.25, we find that this would be 476 years. 476 years after 445 BC is 32 AD.
So according to the prediction, the Messiah would die in the month of Nisan of 32 AD. Alright then, let's see it! Luke 3:1 tells us that Jesus began his ministry "In the fifteenth year of the reign of Tiberius Caesar." Tiberius began to reign in 14 AD, making 29 AD his fifteenth year. Jesus' ministry lasted for three years, and then he was crucified. Since his ministry began in 29 AD, that means the year of his death would have been 32 AD. He died just before Passover, which takes place in the Jewish month of Nisan. So Christ died in Nisan of 32 AD, precisely when Daniel had said the Messiah would die.
The very next thing certain people do is bring up some date conversion calculator they found online and go check Passover in 32 AD. The second thing they tell me is that the gospels all say that Passover started on a Saturday, which is only true, according to these online calculators that is, for AD 30 and 33. I wish I did not need to remind such people that the Israelites did not use our calendar, but it often seems that I must do so. Something you cannot do is convert a day in their calendar to ours, or vice versa, with day-precision accuracy. Normally this would be prime Special Article fodder, however I hear this asinine "counter" far, far too often, so it will remain in the body of this work. I will leave paragraph breaks if you need no convincing on this particular matter. 

The first mistake being made in that argument is in assuming that the date of Passover was in any way fixed. During the Sanhedrin's time there were several factors that would result in its date being altered. This is reported in the Talmud, which says in Sanhedrin 11 that, among other things, "A year may…be intercalated …where it is necessary either for [the improvement of] roads or for [the repair of] bridges, or for the [drying of the] ovens [required for the roasting] of the Passover lambs, or for the sake of pilgrims from distant lands who have left their homes and could not otherwise reach [Jerusalem] in time". It gives other reasons, such as "on account of the premature state of the corn-crops; or that of the fruit-trees; or on account of the lateness of the Tekufah. Any two of these reasons [occurring together] can justify intercalation…"
So there wasn't a hard and fast date for Passover, which alone defeats any simple date conversions. The date of Jesus' crucifixion could vary depending on something like whether the ovens were dry that year! And even then it wouldn't be quite clear how much Passover would be delayed by, since the same source also states that "An objection was raised: How long a period was intercalated in the year? Thirty days. R. Simeon b. Gamaliel said: A month? — R. Papa Said: [The matter is left to the judgment of the intercalary court:] if they wish, they may add a month; or if they wish thirty days." The day of Jesus' crucifixion could vary depending on whether the people in charge simply felt like adding exactly 30 days that year or not!
As you can see, the matter could easily be very inexact. The mistakes continue, because those who give this Saturday argument convert straight from our Gregorian calendar to a Judean one (at best, usually it’s the modern Jewish calendar masquerading as a Judean one); this cannot work. You would have to convert a Gregorian date to a Julian calendar date and then you could go to the Judean calendar. And you cannot even base such a conversion on the modern Jewish calendar, as that was only introduced in the 4th century, and we don't have all the details for the first century calendar and how exactly it functioned. So you cannot, I repeat cannot, nail down the date and day of week like that.
Why? Because it was more based on observation, as opposed to calculation, prior to the 4th century, which only compounds the issue. For example, "The molad [the time of the Moon’s “birth”] occurs when the moon has moved far enough from this position that a thin crescent of its illuminated surface becomes visible, marking the start of a new Jewish month…The actual moment at which the moon becomes visible will vary slightly from the average molad, depending on the relative positions of the earth, moon, and sun to each other at any given month, where on earth the observer is standing, the length of twilight at given seasons of the year, and other astronomical variables." When those criteria would have been met varies depending on a number of things, as you can see. 
So not only did the calendar date fluctuate, but when exactly Nisan was could vary depending on factors that are impossible to calculate today, like when observers in Jerusalem decided the Moon was newly visible. So again, in conclusion, there was not a hard and fast date for Passover. Even if you take into account the random astronomical and imprecise human observation uncertainties, you still have many confounding factors, factors that we cannot even begin to approximate, that prevent the successful conversion of our calendar to theirs. 
I trust that resolves the issue: if anyone says that April 14th 32 AD was a Monday, or gives any other date in our Gregorian calendar, that date is absolutely meaningless in reference to the calendar that was actually in use at the time. I will repeat it again: a Monday in the Gregorian calendar could very easily have been any other day of the week in the calendar actually in use at the time. Therefore, such arguments as this are woefully inadequate in discrediting the Daniel prophecy. 
Once, when I had this argument in the wild west of the open internet, someone said "How do we know God gave Daniel this prophecy, and not magical fairies or aliens with supercomputers?"
	I replied with, "If you would like to believe that fairies with supercomputers gave Daniel a prophecy about Jesus Christ, if that's sincerely an option on the table for you, go for it." Sometimes the best response to nonsense, is more nonsense. 

So, to recap, we have Scripture telling us the year and month a man whose great grandfather hadn't even been born would die. Nearly five hundred years. Five hundred years ago, there was a Holy Roman Emperor. Five hundred years ago, Christopher Columbus had just idiotically declared he "discovered" the Americas. 
	Moving along, there is one other prophecy I wish to discuss about Jesus, one that is recorded in Isaiah 52:13-53:12.  This prophecy is unique in that it portrays someone who suffers for sin as a guilt offering, after being rejected. It has many interesting parallels with the life and death of Christ. The first thing to note is that Isaiah 53 definitively pre-dates Christ: the Dead Sea Scrolls, copies of Old Testament works from the BC era found in the 1940s, include one that is an entire copy of Isaiah, including Isaiah 53.
However, ever mindful of counter-arguments, I would like to establish that Isaiah 53 is indeed a prophesy concerning the messiah, and not all Israel as modern Jews and many others claim.  Now, you might ask, "Why are you talking about the arguments around something before telling us the something?" Because as you read the prophecy I'd like you to be aware of the traditional and most popular challenge to Isaiah 53. Sometimes, it is best to learn about the battle before you learn about the treasure it was fought over, and the biggest competing interpretation of Isaiah 53 is that it refers to all Israel instead of a specific individual.
	I believe the summary of this from The Suffering Servant: Isaiah 53 in Jewish and Christian Sources says it well: "The passage [Isaiah 53] was not only read and interpreted; it was also interpreted messianically [emphasis original]. Nevertheless, the passage's influences in early Judaism is not all of the same type, nor of the type that would necessarily support the preaching of early Christianity … Nevertheless, the demonstrated uses and echoes of this text are enough to suggest that traditions of suffering and atoning eschatological  messianic figures were current in Palestinian Judaism."
	A few examples of temporally relevant interpretation of the passage as messianic have been put in a footnote.  They are not in the main body, because it is not interpretation but the text itself that is important. Back then as today, interpretation of Scripture has never been in lockstep across all readers, and even if no one understood Isaiah 53 to refer to a future messiah, that would not invalidate the interpretation by itself. (To take a silly reductive example, if I write "one plus one equals two," and it is universally accepted that I meant that one plus one equals four, it doesn't change the words I wrote.) Thus, rather than see who said what about Isaiah 53, let's instead look to the best evidence that it does not concern all of Israel, the text itself. (Note that when I say "Suffering Servant," that is the common term used to refer to the figure in Isaiah 53.) Here's a list of the largest differences:
1.	The Suffering Servant is blameless. (Israel is admonished for her sins many, many times, including by Isaiah in Isaiah 58.)
2.	The Suffering Servant dies. (Israel does not die.)
3.	The Suffering Servant bears the sins of many. (Israel does not bear anyone else's sins, Israel is at most a light for others.)
4.	The Suffering Servant suffers silently. (How many times are Israel's lamentations when suffering recorded in the Old Testament?)

These are, to me, the largest differences, though there are a number of others. Next, we have this verse from Isaiah 11:10:
"In that day the root of Jesse, who shall stand as a signal for the peoples—of him shall the nations inquire, and his resting place shall be glorious."

This verse is clearly messianic; Jesse is the father of King David (1 Samuel 16:5-13). We know that, of course, Jesus was descended from David's line, and Revelation 5:5  makes the connection explicit. Now, with that 'root of Jesse' image in your mind, look to Isaiah 53:2:
"For he grew up before him like a young plant, and like a root out of dry ground;"

	The root connection is obvious.  I would argue that universally, where Isaiah describes the 'root', he describes the Messiah. As usual, there are many volumes written on the argument both ways, and I encourage the interested reader to find them and read them. I personally find the above satisfying enough, and so we will continue.  Let's see the prophecy, or rather a summary of it; I strongly recommend you read Isaiah 53, because I intend to continue as though you are baseline familiar with it. There's a lot, so I'll rattle off what it says about the Suffering Servant, or Messiah, and while not all are overly specific, many are eyebrow-raisingly so:
1.	53:3 says he was despised and rejected by men; this frequently happened to Jesus.
2.	53:4 says he would be "esteemed stricken", as in, rejected by his own people; it is no secret that Jesus was rejected by the Jews. 
3.	53:5 says he was "pierced for our transgressions"; unless the gospels are lying, they report Jesus being pierced by a spear upon the cross.
4.	53:7 says he didn't open his mouth in the face of affliction and oppression; the gospels record Christ refusing to answer concerning his charges after being beaten and mocked.
5.	53:9 in part says they "made his grave with the wicked" - he was crucified with two criminals, where he died.
6.	53:9 also says he was buried "with a rich man in his death" - Jesus was laid in the tomb of a wealthy man by Joseph of Arimathea.
7.	53:9, finally, says that he had done no violence and there was no deceit in his mouth. The gospels record Pilate and the Jewish officials failing to find any actual crime he had committed, and, of course, he did not resist his arrest.

Take note that Isaiah wrote this probably seven hundred years before Christ was born. I have seen people try to refute this as applying to Christ by referencing verse 10 : "When I read the part where it says that 'he shall pro-long [sic] his days' and 'he shall see his offspring', I knew that it did not refer to Jesus." That first point only makes sense if you start from the position Christ certainly did not rise from the dead, which is circular reasoning.  
For the second point, "offspring" is really the wrong English word there. The original Hebrew, zera, can mean human offspring, sure. It can also mean seed, see Genesis 1:29,  among other things. The point is, if you try to say "this means whoever Isaiah 53 is talking about had children!" you cannot make that argument with any degree of certainty from the Hebrew. 
Further, no one sees the word "crushed" in 53:5 and takes it to mean he must be literally crushed; therefore we need not take every single word literally. Indeed, that would be generally unwise when reading prophecies from the Old Testament. However, if you're about to go write a review on Amazon or wherever and say "this dude just arbitrarily decides when things are literal or not when it suits him," I have in fact written an entire Special Article arguing for, very specifically, why it is acceptable to interpret crushed in a metaphorical manner and why pierced is to be taken literally; that entry is Special Article E. Again, in the case of "offspring," a long digression is not necessary since the Hebrew word simply does not exclusively or even mostly mean "human children." Oh and, I should mention it refers to "prolonging his days," which is not something Israel can do, but the resurrection is something Jesus did. I don't really use that as part of the evidence for the prophecy, though, since it demands you accept Jesus as a resurrecting messiah to defend the prophecy as being about resurrecting messiah.
But I digress. The prophecy is best rendered as referring to the future suffering of the Messiah. It captures details about that event, to which some could be said "well of course a guy you predict is going to die by his people's hands is going to be rejected by his people," while others, such as the piercing or the tomb of the wealthy man, are much harder to dismiss. Further, a fair few of these were beyond the influence or control of the man himself, and indeed several were also beyond the influence or control of his followers as well. 
Personally, I find the Daniel prophecy to be far more compelling and effective when used against adversaries to the faith. After all, Jesus was fully aware of this chapter in Isaiah, he even quoted from it and by his own admission did things to fulfill it.  But I am always asked for proof-positive of the divinity of Scripture, and I would say that predicting not only the exact month an event takes place, but also describing it in precise detail, could only be indicative of divine orchestration.  
It might be useful to compare these two to a prophecy I chose not to include. see Psalm 69’s twenty first verse: “They gave me poison for food, and for my thirst they gave me sour wine to drink.” 

Now anybody who has read the account of the crucifixion will recall the bit about the sour wine, and thus many say this is a prophecy of Christ. Of course it is – but you can’t defend that to an outsider. The only possible defense is circular: Christ drank sour wine so the reference to drinking sour wine refers to Christ. Again, it is a prophecy of Christ, but I would never use it as evidence in an argument for Christ being the Messiah or the divine inspiration of Scripture. See the difference between that and Isaiah? Isaiah is specific both in terms of who it refers to and what happened. Psalm 69 is a handful of lines with no way to limit their application to any one person. 
Here's something else about that is compelling about Daniel and Isaiah, though, is that in Jesus' lifetime, they did not have the knowledge of Babylonian court functions that we do. They had no idea that Daniel's prophecy referred to Nisan that year, which can be reinforced by the gospel writers' own lack of understanding concerning Christ’s preferred title, Son of Man.  If Jesus was just a man, where did he get the cuneiform samples necessary to translate, where did he get the Babylonian court documents to then translate, to figure out they used a 360-day year? Where would he have gotten the idea to do that in the first place? He was a builder, not a linguist. The Jewish scholars of his day all assumed, at the earliest, a decades later date for Daniel's prophecy, specifically because they did not have that information.  
So if a detractor asks, "Didn't Jesus also delay his return to Jerusalem for the same reason, to make his death align with Daniel?" My reply here is first that there's no way Jesus had access to a correct interpretation of the dating used in Daniel (this also goes for the authors of the gospels; they also did not have access to that information). Second, Micah 5:2 tells us the messiah will come from Bethlehem, which all evidence points to Christ having done so.  So not only was Jesus born in the correct town, but all the circumstances of his life and death, that he could not have controlled specifically, line up with the prophecies. I will grant the detractor this, it is not impossible that he orchestrated it all! But it is also possible Pilate could have had him flogged and released; he might've been thrown in prison instead, like so many of his followers were after his death. All Jesus did was go to Jerusalem around Passover (and be antagonistic to the authorities, of course). Everything else was out of his hands.
Upon reflection, editing this several years after it was originally written, I have another something to note for the sake of intellectual honesty. If you haven’t heard about the Antikythera mechanism, I’ll tell you in brief. In the early 20th century, sponge divers found a Greek shipwreck with a bunch of bronze artifacts, from possibly 205 BC. Long story short, one of those artifacts turned out to be an astronomical calculator of sorts, or perhaps a form of orrery, capable of predicting eclipses and the retrograde motion of certain planets, among other things. (To what degree of accuracy I do not know nor is it relevant.) What is relevant, though, is the supposition that the Greeks used Babylonian calculations in the construction of the device. While the connection is not ironclad, they could have used their own derivations, I will mention it nonetheless. Two points: 
1.	Babylonian records of eclipses would not necessarily contain the information needed to properly calculate Daniel's prophecy, nor would it be obvious that this was the correct calendar to use with the prophecy. For instance, Ptolemy had access to Babylonian records… translated into the Greek calendar. These would be useless.
2.	The information being present in ancient Greece 200 years prior to Christ's birth is an incredibly tenuous connection; 200 years ago colonialism in Africa was just getting started and the industrial revolution was ongoing. The temporal and geographical distances have to be taken into account. 
So while a minor point in my view, once I heard the information I was compelled to add it: it is not impossible the Babylonian calendar information did persist to Christ’s time, but there is no evidence of such, and there certainly isn’t any evidence that the Jewish scholars of the time had access to it, much less that they connected it with Daniel’s prophecy. 
Moving on, you would not be remiss in reminding me that I have not actually shown yet that Jesus did in fact exist and die where and when as described. Rather than rely solely on Scripture to be compelling, we must seek out hostile and indifferent sources that show he existed.
What follows are short descriptions of the evidence we have from generally hostile sources. Please don't take this as a 'hurling the rain'  tactic; I'm not trying to convince you by tossing out every citation I can find. There are entire books dedicated merely to the subject of Christ's existence and the authenticity of his crucifixion, so this section is to be taken as more of an introduction to the subject than a rigorous, cutting edge argument.  Also, I don't plan to give much information on the people themselves. 
Tacitus, a Roman historian and senator (a hostile witness ), mentions "the Christ" in his annals. He also described Christ's fate as being the "extreme penalty" (Perseus Under Philologic: Tac. Ann. 15.44). The precise words are supplicio adfectus erat, which means "inflict the death penalty upon."
Josephus, an important Jewish historian and friend to (Roman emperor) Vespasian's son Titus, mentions Jesus in his works: "Now there was about this time Jesus… He drew over to him both many of the Jews and many of the Gentiles. And when Pilate, at the suggestion of the principal men amongst us, had condemned him to the cross…" 
The quote goes on, but some of it is argued as being a later addition by Christians. I tend to agree. He is suspiciously approving of Christ in the un-quoted portion, yet calls him the “so-called Christ" elsewhere. Regardless, even without the later additions, the parts where he confirms Pilate had him crucified has never been questioned as illegitimate, and indeed, there is no reason to think so.  Frankly, I think the obvious later addition only makes it more legitimate: we can see what a nefarious actor adding something to the quote actually looks like. 
Suetonius, yet another Roman historian, mentions Christianity, and specifically mentions Christ as the founder of this troublesome religion: "Because the Jews at Rome caused continuous disturbance at the instigation of Chrestus, he [Claudius] expelled them from the city" (Claudius, 25:4; note that in Acts 18:2 Luke mentioned this expulsion by Claudius). Chrestus is a misspelling of Christos, since that translates to the Hebrew 'Messiah'. Suetonius also said: "Punishments were also inflicted on the Christians, a sect professing a new and mischievous religious belief" (Nero, 16:2). Pliny the Younger, a Roman magistrate (among other things), references Christ directly in his letters, three times specifically as the originator of Christianity. 
There are others, such as Mara Bar-Serapion, and Lucian of Samasota, who wrote letters discussing Jesus and his execution. Christ's existence and the evidence for his execution is excellent given the standards we have for other ancient events.  I stand by this bold claim: someone who does not believe Christ existed will not be able to produce an argument that would not also simultaneously invalidate the existence of many other ancient persons, such as Alexander the Great. If someone tries to argue against the existence of Christ, ask them to apply that same standard to any other given ancient. If they refuse, then you know you are actually arguing against an anti-Christian bias. Thus, we can comfortably say that the man Jesus Christ existed, and was more likely than not executed by the Romans. You only really find terminally online weirdos arguing otherwise, though, or people who want to sell books to those same folks. Let’s get to the more interesting stuff.
There are some other miscellaneous attacks leveled against his crucifixion, and I shall cover some of them briefly. It is sometimes claimed, for instance, that it would take an Olympic athlete to carry a whole cross the distance Jesus had to carry his. Alright, let's see if that holds water. First off, it's unlikely the whole cross was carried: it was common practice for the victim to carry the horizontal part, the patibulum, to where they would be executed.  But, how could a tortured Jesus carry even this much? Let's see relevant verses, and as an added bonus, resolve a supposed 'contradiction,' concerning who exactly carried it (John 19:16-17):
"So they took Jesus and led Him away. And He, bearing His cross, went out." 

Matthew 27:32:
"Now as they came out, they found a man of Cyrene, Simon by name. Him they compelled to bear His cross."

Here we see that the wounded Jesus didn't carry the patibulum the whole way, he "only" carried it to the edge of the city or a little past that. A perfectly healthy adult male then took the patibulum from there. This is common practice, and there exists ample evidence to support that this was a standard component of crucifixion; if "olympic athletes" were required, it wouldn't have been done.
What about the darkness that occurred as a result of Jesus' death? Mark 15:33:
"And when the sixth hour had come, there was darkness over the whole land until the ninth hour"

For starters, it was not the product of a normal eclipse (this is a common mistake people make that also contributes to the calendar misunderstanding). Fortunately, there are hostile sources for us to use to back it up, since we can't trust Christian ones alone to report on the darkness, as they had motivation to lie. So we have three hours of total darkness, which means people around Jerusalem and elsewhere should have seen something, and some of them should have written it down, and some of that writing should have survived until today, right?
A man named Thallus, a historian covering the eastern Mediterranean since the Trojan War, wrote about the darkness, and while we've lost his writing (from about 52 AD), someone else named Julius Africanus referenced him around 200 AD, quoting him to disagree with the cause of the eclipse:
"Thallus, in the third book of his histories, explains away the darkness as an eclipse of the sun—unreasonably as it seems to me."
Thallus was a hostile source, and Africanus is arguing with him about the cause of the darkness, not whether or not it occurred. Africanus himself was a convert, so we cannot precisely trust his words; however, we can more reasonably trust his quoting the man Thallus to disagree with him, since that is not Africanus' testimony, and the work was available when he quoted it to whoever he was writing to.
Phlegon was a Greek historian, and wrote the following sometime around 137 AD (again, being quoted by an apologist later):
"In the fourth year of the 202nd Olympiad [29 AD to 33 AD, so within our time frame] there was 'the greatest eclipse of the sun' and that 'it became night in the sixth hour of the day so that stars even appeared in the heavens. There was a great earthquake in Bithynia, and many things were overturned in Nicaea."
This one nicely corroborates the time of day, even. Note that Phlegon is not a Christian, and does not mention Jesus; he was using records other than Christian sources, which lends legitimacy to the argument. Tertullian, a second century apologist, appeals to the records the Romans and others held in their own archives with regards to the darkness:
"At the moment of Christ's death, the light departed from the sun, and the land was darkened at noonday, which wonder is related in your own annals, and is preserved in your archives to this day."
It is unlikely he would have made this claim if it were not known or verifiable that the archives held such documents. The first rebuttal I hear is often this: "why didn't Josephus, Tacitus, Suetonius or others record the darkness?" However this is an argument from silence; we cannot know why they didn't, or know for certain that they didn't, so it makes no sense to conjecture about it, and even less to rely on that as evidence. Further, they almost certainly thought it was a regular eclipse, and thus not worth commenting upon – the same as other eclipses.
As for the earthquake that occurred in conjunction with the darkness, an article published in the International Geology Review, titled "An early first-century earthquake in the Dead Sea", says this:
"To analyze earthquake activity in the region, geologist Jefferson Williams of Supersonic Geophysical and colleagues Markus Schwab and Achim Brauer of the German Research Center for Geosciences studied three cores from the beach of the Ein Gedi Spa adjacent to the Dead Sea.
Varves, which are annual layers of deposition in the sediments, reveal that at least two major earthquakes affected the core: a widespread earthquake in 31 B.C. and a seismic event that happened sometime between the years 26 and 36 AD." 
Which gives us evidence for the earthquake occurring within the appropriate time as well, and corroborates Phlegon, lending additional legitimacy to his statement. One piece of evidence corroborates both at the same time. King Abgar of Edessa, a small kingdom, wrote a letter to Emperor Tiberius about the matter. (Note I am not referring to the obvious forgery. If you google this, you're going to read primarily about the forged letter. Let me say this again: they are not the same letter. I offer defense of the letter after relaying its relevant contents.) First off, Abgar was a convert to Christianity, yet he was not, and could have not, been familiar with the gospels since they were written after his death (he died in 40 AD, or thereabouts). Here is the relevant portion of the letter:
"Abgar, king of Armenia, to my Lord Tiberius, emperor of the Romans, greeting: I know that nothing is unknown to your Majesty, but, as your friend, I would make you better acquainted with the facts by writing … Be assured that these are not the effects of the power of a simple mortal, but of God. During the time that they were crucifying Him, the Sun was darkened, the earth was moved, shaken…"
Abgar would not have reported this to Emperor Tiberius if he was not fully convinced it were true, so we have a contemporary of Jesus who wrote about it directly. In the first sentence after the greeting, Abgar says that Tiberius has certainly already heard of the events he is describing, but Abgar just wants to relate all the facts as he knows them. This is a serious confirmation of the fact that this was a well-known event, that Abgar is confident that the Emperor knows about it. 
What follows is my defense of this important text. There are two letters that we know of. One of them purportedly records a message from Abgar to Jesus, and Jesus back to Abgar. There are those who argue tooth and nail for the authenticity of this conversation (my brother among them!), but I do not. As far as the authenticity of this second letter goes, I will relay the following: Eusebius (a later apologist) records the almost-certainly-forged letter from Jesus to Abgar, but he does not record the letter between Tiberius and Abgar. Since Eusebius didn’t know about it, this means that the source for these two letters was different, and we can reliably separate the forged Abgar-Jesus correspondence from the Abgar-Tiberius letter.
The Abgar-Tiberius letter left some traces in a work by a scholar known to us as Moses of Chorene, and a Syriac work called Transitus Mariae. I’ll rely upon the work of Illaria L.E. Ramelli, a scholar in Roman Near Eastern History: The Possible Origin of the Abgar-Addai Legend: Abgar the Black and Emperor Tiberius. She argues that the Abgar-Tiberius letter is correct whenever it references historical events, which would not be the case for a much later Christian forgery (this paragraph is a summary of her argument). For instance, Tiberius needed the support of kings near the Parthians, and Abgar had just risen to power following an usurpation, and needed legitimacy; the letter appeals to both of these historical facts. In his reply, Tiberius recorded he had deposed Pilate, and indeed, Lucius Vitellius had in fact deposed Pilate (noted by Josephus). Lucius Vitellius is recorded by Moses of Chorene, and he (Lucius) is known to have been in control of Palestine at the time. Further, in the letter, there is a mention of the "Children of Spain." If that referred to actual Spain, it would have been  an anachronistic tell-tale sign of forgery. However! In actuality, this demonstrates great awareness of the political situation of the appropriate timeframe. The "Children of Spain" are the Iberians of Caucasian Iberia, or Georgia. 
I recommend reading her whole paper if you find the Abgar-Tiberius letter to be still in doubt, but in short, it reflects the actual state on the ground in the 30s AD quite well, and is far more believable than the Abgar-Jesus correspondence. Again, I find the presence of an obvious forgery to only lend credence to the actual thing; for two reasons. One, it means Abgar was a known, prominent figure. Two, it shows you what a later forgery looks like and what it lacks. 
Let me restate the Abgar-Tiberius letter’s importance: it means we have strong evidence that the Roman Emperor was aware of the darkness and earthquake. He seems to have believed they were from another source, however, and Abgar was trying to correct his understanding. That’s immaterial; what is important is that we can verify that there were no eclipses or regional volcanic events at the time, so we’re left with few options for a regional darkness. Let’s also not forget, Abgar was alive at the same time as Jesus, and this letter must have been written before his death around 40 AD.
The darkness, the earthquake, and the crucifixion have thus all, given a reasonable standard of evidence for two thousand year old events, been shown to be plausible at the very least.
 What about the empty tomb? The first thing to note is that women were the first to report it, in a hotly patriarchal society. If someone were trying to lie about the empty tomb, they would, in all likelihood, not have used women. Scripture itself even reports no one believing them. Of course, ancient critics often accused the Christians of stealing the body.  Tertullian a famous apologist (who eventually became a heretic, I should add) writing in the 2nd and 3rd centuries, talked about the rumor of him being stolen away (in De Spectaculis). He said that Christ would mock those who said he was stolen from the tomb when he came back, which implies that this was a fairly widespread rumor. 
The fact that there are only arguments about why the tomb was empty and not whether is important. That means that it is incredibly likely that the tomb really was empty.  Looked at independently, the missing body isn't really impressive. It's like when someone tells me a ghost story: I don't care what they say occurred, I know there is a perfectly normal explanation hidden somewhere. The explanation put forth most often was and is that the body was stolen; it makes sense. But where ghost stories and Christ's body being gone differ is in the circumstances. I have thus far made the case that Jesus was a real person who was crucified, his death was predicted hundreds of years prior to the month, the details of his suffering were given in precise detail, there was an earthquake, and there was an inexplicable darkness. All of that taken together should force you to sit up and take the event seriously. A ghost story is going to be someone you sort of know telling you this he said-she saw nonsense with no corroboration but a few pairs of eyeballs. Here we have a vastly different arsenal of evidence and related materials.
So, what of the resurrection itself? Understandably, evidence of this is hard to come by, and is limited to Scripture and some related materials. A large number of people came to believe that they had truly interacted with a resurrected Jesus. We know they genuinely believed they had, since the majority of them would be tortured and killed for their belief. Paul and James, zealous critics of Jesus (and subsequently his followers), also believed he interacted with them after his death, and died for it. The Bible isn't the only report on this. A Christian named Ignatius reported on the absolute belief of those who said they witnessed his resurrection (from To the Smyrneans, chapter 3):
"…after His resurrection…they touched Him, and believed, being convinced both by His flesh and spirit."
To add to the list, Polycarp, Dionysius of Corinth, Tertullian, Clement of Rome, Origen, Celsus (notable Roman critic of Christianity)… all discuss the firm and unrelenting belief of the people who claimed they saw none other than a resurrected Jesus. Sure, these are largely Christians sans Celsus, but their testimony is nonetheless valuable as a report of what people believed, and some of them were fairly close temporally to the actual events. Mass delusion is really out of the question since the witnesses saw Christ on different days and at different times. Was it a mass lie? Possibly, but if so, it was such a lie that many who said they saw him were willing to be tortured to death for it. We have four accounts of the same events. Now, detractors will tell me, "they're untrustworthy because of the contradictions." If I grant that there are contradictions, which I don’t, but let’s say I do - then all that does is cement that these are four independently researched and written narratives. That would mean that whatever they report in common was arrived at through independent efforts. And that’s a whole lot of testimony about a 2,000 year old event.
And if there aren't contradictions, that also helps the argument of legitimacy, since that means we have four independently researched and written chronicles  that all report the exact same events, also a great sign of authenticity and veracity.  Do you see how in either case, there are or are not contradictions in the gospels, the case for their being legitimate is strengthened? It's a catch-22 for detractors. Either they report the exact same series of events in remarkable detail, or they all report the same critical chain of events, which is the only set that matters, in chronicles written decades and distances apart.
The Bible itself records Jesus' own brother James publicly challenging him, which didn't make either of them look good. Not having your family believe you, in those days, was particularly bad; thus, it lends additional legitimacy to the depictions of the resurrection sightings contained therein. Why? Because if someone is interested only in making something believable, they are more likely to leave out something as scandalous as his own brother doubting him. (Again, James numbers among those killed for his belief; he was eventually stoned to death for it.)
So we have a large number of witnesses who clearly believed they hadn't seen a "trick of the light" or some such, and died for it. The likelihood that of all those who were tortured and died for claiming they witnessed the resurrection, and not a single one said that it was actually a big hoax… is low, to say the least. (I grant that it is not impossible, but we’re coming to that. I should mention that we’re told that some Christians did recant their testimony when called before Roman authorities. But there’s a difference between later converts going “you know I don’t actually want to die,” and people at the time saying they were included in a massive conspiracy. Perhaps records of such just didn’t make it to us, but given how hotly the Jews contested the empty tomb, if there were former Christians who claimed it was a hoax we almost certainly would’ve heard about it.)
We know (or it is reported to us) that over 500 people saw him over about twelve different occurrences and up to about 40 days after his death. He ate and drank with them, talked with them, and they touched him on several occasions (again, as reported). So whatever occurred, they weren't deluded by some physical phenomena, they most likely can't all have been lying, and in fact would have easily been called out…
…But, stopping rather abruptly, I think we all know where we have landed. I've stopped mid-thought to bring you back to awareness. It was, of course, inevitable: the end of the evidence. The thing is, you can argue and bicker about any given individual piece of evidence above; what happens, though, is that as you add each individual piece, it starts to paint a picture that is harder and harder to deny. When I put them all together, the Daniel and Isaiah prophecies, the earthquake, the darkness, the resurrection witnesses, the hostile testimony that he existed… the truth became clear to me, and I was well and truly convinced. Christ was no mere man of flesh and blood. 
I leave the above with you for contemplation.

INTERLUDE: JOY

 

THE CRITICAL TRIPLET & THE NON-MIRACULOUS NOW
	Bertrand Russell is a name that comes up sometimes, if you dabble in philosophy. Actually, I almost named this section "Bertrand's Triplet," but decided against it, because he did not originate this challenge nor was he its greatest proponent. I, as a big fan of the Old Testament prophecies of Jesus, had something of a facepalm d'oh moment when I realized that I had failed to write in any great measure about the prophecies of Jesus, as in, those given by the Son of Man himself. There are three sets of verses that come up quite frequently as being supposedly rather difficult for Christians to handle. In point of fact, I would have made this discussion a Special Article, were it not for the fact these verses clearly trouble many Christians. True, if these verses said what is claimed, we'd be in deep water: critics claim they say that Christ was supposed to return before 100 AD and other such things. Problematic if so! 
But without further ado, here they are, and their explanations. Frankly I feel I've set them up too much, for they have almost disappointingly simple explanations. Critics will really twist anything they can, I suppose.
	Matthew 10:23 is the first:
"When they persecute you in one town, flee to the next, for truly, I say to you, you will not have gone through all the towns of Israel before the Son of Man comes."

	This first one is purported to say "Christ meant that when his followers had visited all the towns of Israel his second coming wound occur." But if you read Matthew 10, there's… no evidence that this refers to the end times coming of Christ, I mean none. He doesn't frankly explain what he's referring to much at all. You could just as easily say it means "before he goes to Jerusalem to his death and comes into glory" as anything. I frankly don't even understand why this one is so heavily cited; it's grasping at straws at best. 
	
	Luke 9:27:
	"But I tell you truly, there are some standing here who will not taste death until they see the kingdom of God."

	If you read literally five verses before this one, in 9:22, Christ talks about his coming death. This makes it apparent that Christ is talking about his coming death and resurrection. Again, I really don't understand why critical scholars try to assign a meaning to this that is above what is obviously there. There's no mention whatsoever of the end times, unless you torture the phrase "kingdom of God" to mean something unsupported by the phrase's use all over the New Testament by Jesus himself. 
	The third text is more or less the whole of Mark chapter 13, narrowly rendered as verses 14-30. They describe incredible destruction and woe with intense apocalyptic language. The verse of contention, though, is verse 30:
	"Truly, I say to you, this generation will not pass away until all these things take place."
	
	What we are dealing with is a critical claim that can be summarized thusly: "This passage clearly states that Christ's second return would occur, by any reasonable definition, promptly, not more than two thousand years later."
	My argument, stated equally succinctly, is that the actual prophesy contained in these verses, and their parallels in the other gospels, was fulfilled in 70 AD with the destruction of Jerusalem by Rome. If you aren't familiar with the events of 70 AD, here's a rough summary. The Jews had revolted, and the Roman general Titus, sent by the emperor Vespasian (who replaced Nero) laid siege to Jerusalem as part of the Roman campaign against the rebels. The Romans surrounded the city in an attempt to starve out the defenders. In short order, they breached the walls and destroyed the Second Temple.
	In Mark 13:2, Jesus predicts the destruction of the temple, and indeed Jerusalem itself. The other gospels mention that Israel would be surrounded by armies (notably Luke 20) and such other things. So we're talking about the destruction of Jerusalem, as it occurred in 70 AD. See this section from Mark, 13:24-27: 
"But in those days, after that tribulation, the sun will be darkened, and the moon will not give its light, and the stars will be falling from heaven, and the powers in the heavens will be shaken. And then they will see the Son of Man coming in clouds with great power and glory. And then he will send out the angels and gather his elect from the four winds, from the ends of the earth to the ends of heaven."

	First, we see here standard apocalyptic cosmic destruction. Isaiah 13:9-11:
"See, the day of the Lord is coming —a cruel day, with wrath and fierce anger— to make the land desolate and destroy the sinners within it. The stars of heaven and their constellations will not show their light. The rising sun will be darkened and the moon will not give its light. I will punish the world for its evil, the wicked for their sins. I will put an end to the arrogance of the haughty and will humble the pride of the ruthless."

Same stuff, but about a similar relatively local judgement by God. Hence why it's called apocalyptic literature; it's necessarily grandiose in its descriptions. The rest of Isaiah 13 confirms for us that this is the case, since after these descriptions, it's revealed that the prophecy concerns the conquest of the Babylonians by the Medes. Obviously, there were still believing Jews after that event, so that tells us that no one saw this and went "See, God said he would shake the stars and he didn't so he's not real." More like, "Ah, grandiose apocalyptic destruction. Yes I understand."
	Let's do the last sentence, about angels, before the middle sentence about the Son of Man, from Mark 13. It's worth noting that "angels" can just mean "messenger"; in fact that is what angelous means. It doesn't necessarily imply a cosmic being like we're used to picturing. Thus, this is also easily explained: after 70 AD, Christians spread out and shared the gospel with an ever-growing part of the world, to the modern day. Which just leaves us with this:
"And then they will see the Son of Man coming in clouds with great power and glory."

So let's look at this with honest eyes, as we should. It's nestled between two apocalyptic-literature descriptions of the siege of Jerusalem and following diaspora. Does it then follow, again if we are trying to analyze the text honestly, that this sentence, among its fore and aft context, must for some reason be interpreted with strict literalism? Of course not. Do I know precisely what it means? Not particularly. Is it necessary to have an exact interpretation? No, not really, given that it's easily established as symbolic. Once you see that it is symbolism, our ability to place a firm interpretation upon it in order to establish its veracity becomes moot. It could easily be referring to Christians (or anybody) at the time understanding God's power in predicting and executing this judgement upon Israel; and there'd be no real way to argue against that effectively. Stated bluntly, since it's reasonably established as symbolic, there's no real way to argue it wasn't fulfilled somehow and possibly just not written down in records that survived to be recorded and reach us. (I return to this down below, though.)
Really these verses just represent the accurate and specific prophetic power of Christ, and that's that. There's no mention of the destruction of the world and all. Personally, I see much not all!  of the Book of Revelation also applying to the destruction in 70 AD as well. It simply makes too much sense, and aligns too well. Silly attempts to make 666 literally equal some name are exactly that: silly.  Numbers throughout the book are used in symbolic ways, so 666 should be treated no differently (e.g., perhaps it is symbolic of incompleteness, less than 777). Again, similar apocalyptic literature used in the Old Testament uses equally dire language, and equally expansive terminology, yet refers to a relatively local event. Revelation was also written around the right time, and John, its author, talks about the imminence of the described events. Further, the churches referenced were quite literal, nearby churches.
Ironically, when these three are quoted, they leave out one I personally would think detractors would leap at; John 21:22, where Christ, responding to Peter who has just found out he's going to be martyred, says:
"Jesus said to him, 'If it is my will that he remain until I come, what is that to you? You follow me!'"

I've heard a few times people cite this one as evidence Christ was supposed to come back before John died, and then cite that John, of course, died before 100 AD. I'm fairly certain a poor reading of this difficulty is why the Mormons believe John is still walking around today (John even addresses that in this very chapter, in verse 23). But frankly, it's no difficulty to resolve it. Christ is actually saying "If I wanted him to live until the end of time, what's that to you? What happens to him is none of your business." It's hyperbole to jog Peter. How do I know that? Because of the very misunderstanding referenced in Scripture and picked up by the Mormons. One must assume at the outset that Christ was going to return beyond the normal lifespan of a man if they thought Christ was saying John wouldn't die at all, ever. Otherwise, one would take it to mean John would not be martyred, not that he wouldn't die. 
Which brings us to the end of the section on the Critical Triplet, yet another sad attack on Christianity perpetuated by those who don't even bother to read the book they hate for more than five seconds, except to cherry-pick verses they don't like or confirm their pre-conceived notions. Seriously, the Matthew and Luke verses are so easily dismissed as being unproblematic it's almost bothersome I had to write about them, and I wouldn't have, if I didn't have people arguing that these disprove Christianity all the time. But when I have challenged those detractors with the above, they can never more than fumble and make baseless claims in response. 
There are two last thoughts for this section. One, an explanation for why we don't see obvious signs, miracles, or spiritual gifts anymore (hence this chapter also being called the "non-miraculous now"), and two, a final reminder about evil and God's promises.
But to the first one. This could be problematic, right? "Oh yeah ok so God did all that stuff two thousand years ago, or more! And then just stopped? Riiiiiight." Without an explicit reason for it, we may be caught by this. (Note that I am essentially calling anyone in the modern world who claims to have healing, prophetic, or other powers a charlatan or at best a cosmically deluded fool. Also, there's the massive problem that people who "have spiritual gifts" like this, don't even use them in the way they're supposed to be used. Tongues, for instance, has a specific standard, specific uses, specific conditions,  and the examples, such as at Pentecost where the apostles spoke in other languages to the assembled crowd, look nothing like the foolishness we see on display today. But anyways, I digress. I'm arguing that these miracles, these gifts, are no longer part of the normative Christian experience.)  It's important to remember that, really, miracles happened in three great swathes: with Moses, Elijah, and Christ and his Apostles. They always served a purpose: they established the credibility of the speaker, and identified them as speaking words directly from God. Acts 2:22:
"Fellow Israelites, listen to this: Jesus of Nazareth was a man accredited by God to you by miracles, wonders and signs, which God did among you through him, as you yourselves know."

Hebrews 2:3-4:
"This salvation, which was first announced by the Lord, was confirmed to us by those who heard him. God also testified to it by signs, wonders and various miracles, and by gifts of the Holy Spirit distributed according to his will."

If miracles are special markers of special (or specific) revelation, then it's quite easy to see that when the Apostles died, they ended, for there was no one left delivering special revelation. 1 Corinthians 13 has a lot to say on this, but the verses I want to narrow in on are these:
"Love never fails. But where there are prophecies, they will cease; where there are tongues, they will be stilled; where there is knowledge, it will pass away. For we know in part and we prophesy in part, but when completeness comes, what is in part disappears." 

Now you may have something of a hint as to why I paired this with the dialogue about the Critical Triplet. It should come as no surprise that I'm going to say that once Christ's prophecy was fulfilled in roughly 70 AD, that was the completeness that was coming. Then, as the last Apostles died in the decades following 70 AD, that was it. The Church had been founded, it was spreading, it was structured, and it had all of God's guidance that it needed in the form of Scripture and the indwelling Holy Spirit. Since the verses from Corinthians tell us that the signs and wonders and gifts will end, and then the events of 70 AD happened and were a natural end point for those gifts… it only makes sense to say "yep, that happened, and the gifts were no longer necessary." Jeremiah 3:15-16:
"And I will give you shepherds after my own heart, who will feed you with knowledge and understanding. And when you have multiplied and been fruitful in the land, in those days, declares the Lord, they shall no more say, 'The ark of the covenant of the Lord.' It shall not come to mind or be remembered or missed; it shall not be made again."

	Why have I quoted these verses from Jeremiah? Because God was there talking about a change from an obvious, physical symbol of his power to what we have now. Today, we have shepherds after his own heart, and no miracles. Then, they had shepherds after his own heart, and no ark. 
But to reinforce the point, here are some verses from acts that clarify this, first Acts 1:8:
"But you will receive power when the Holy Spirit comes on you; and you will be my witnesses in Jerusalem, and in all Judea and Samaria, and to the ends of the earth."

Acts 2:17-18, quoting the prophet Joel:
"In the last days, God says, I will pour out my Spirit on all people. Your sons and daughters will prophesy, your young men will see visions, your old men will dream dreams. Even on my servants, both men and women, I will pour out my Spirit in those days, and they will prophesy."

Note the connection there between 'last days' and last days in this verse of Hebrews, 1:2, which identifies what the 'last days' are; they're the days of his Son on earth:
"but in these last days he has spoken to us by his Son, whom he appointed the heir of all things, through whom also he created the world."

	And one final set of verses to connect the 'last days' to the coming judgement of Jerusalem and Israel, James 5:1-9:
"Come now, you rich, weep and howl for the miseries that are coming upon you. … You have laid up treasure in the last days. … You have fattened your hearts in a day of slaughter. You have condemned and murdered the righteous person. He does not resist you. Be patient, therefore, brothers, until the coming of the Lord. … Establish your hearts, for the coming of the Lord is at hand. Do not grumble against one another, brothers, so that you may not be judged; behold, the Judge is standing at the door."

	We, or perhaps just I, see plainly that James is connecting the last days with the coming judgement of Israel in 70 AD. In fact, this really lends support to my previous interpretation that "And then they will see the Son of Man coming in clouds with great power and glory." is an apocalyptic metaphor for the destruction and woe visited upon Israel, for James himself connects the coming of the Lord with judgement. So it helps both my purposes. 
	"Hold on just a minute," said one detractor reading all of the above. "What about John 21:22? There's no mistaking that one! Christ meant he was coming back to see John, physically! That's the second coming!" Here are the verses in question, John 21:22-24:
"When Peter saw him, he asked, 'Lord, what about him?' Jesus answered, 'If I want him to remain alive until I return, what is that to you? You must follow me.' Because of this, the rumor spread among the believers that this disciple would not die. But Jesus did not say that he would not die; he only said, 'If I want him to remain alive until I return, what is that to you?' This is the disciple who testifies to these things and who wrote them down…"

If you recall, I previously discussed the date of authorship of John, albeit briefly while mentioning the four independent accounts of Christ's death, and this gospel was written after 70 AD. Considering the massive, blinding importance of Christ's physical return in "clouds" (Mark 13:26) and the like, John would not have neglected, if Christ did not come back, to leave this quote out or alter it. The better argument though is this, from John 14:
"I will not leave you as orphans; I will come to you. Yet a little while and the world will see me no more, but you will see me. Because I live, you also will live. In that day you will know that I am in my Father, and you in me, and I in you. Whoever has my commandments and keeps them, he it is who loves me. And he who loves me will be loved by my Father, and I will love him and manifest myself to him." 

As you see here, Christ explains what he means by "come," and this reveals to us that "come" is not necessarily or exclusively the final coming of Christ in power and glory. So no, John 21 is not problematic. Far from it! John himself didn't see a glaring contradiction there.
With that, I feel the case has been reasonably made that there was a definite purpose to miracles, that purpose was fulfilled at a non-arbitrary time, and they ended in due course, so there is no reason to expect more overt miracles and gifts in our time.  And further, that many of the troublesome verses we see are readily explained by apocalyptic literary devices and a connection with the severe destruction of Jerusalem in 70 AD. Let's wrap this section up with 2 Peter 3:3-4:
"…knowing this first of all, that scoffers will come in the last days with scoffing, following their own sinful desires. They will say, 'Where is the promise of his coming? For ever since the fathers fell asleep, all things are continuing as they were from the beginning of creation."

We immediately see that even while Peter was alive, he predicted what the Church would be dealing with. See 2 Peter 3:9: 
"The Lord is not slow to fulfill his promise as some count slowness, but is patient toward you, not wishing that any should perish, but that all should reach repentance." 

	There's the Scriptural reason (one reason anyways) the Son hasn't come back yet; he's giving us a chance. He's being patient with us just like he was with Israel for nigh on millennia. So, there you have it, the last small piece of the "non-miraculous now" puzzle. With that, I'd call this part finished.

HOW WE GOT THE BIBLE
I keep referring to the word "Scripture," perhaps annoyingly to some who would just wish I would say "the Bible," but the two are in fact distinct. After all, what if the Bible is missing something important, or has something in it, it rather should not have? 2nd Timothy 3:16-17 says this:
"All Scripture is God-breathed and is useful for teaching, rebuking, correcting and training in righteousness, so that the servant of God may be thoroughly equipped for every good work."

Romans 3:4 says this (in part):
"Let God be true, and every human being a liar."

	That's a fine standard, then, not just from these example verses but the whole of what we know from the prophets and others of authority: if we know all Scripture is God-breathed, that is, infallible words of God spoken through the voices of human authors, the contrapositive can also be assumed: if it is not god breathed, it is not Scripture. And we can only trust God-breathed materials, since every man is a liar. Hold on, though, some may say: "are you using the Bible itself to determine its own trustworthiness?" No, not quite. I use those verses because Scripture offers us its own standard for what qualifies as Scripture and what does not. My point, therefore, is that Scripture tells us what counts, and we are told God spoke through the prophets and Apostles by the Holy Spirit. This means that if a random human being says something concerning God, the proper question to ask them is "who are you? Did God give you authority to speak on this topic? From which of his words do you derive that statement?" The Christian faith is entirely reliant upon the words we have; what words qualify is of the utmost importance. Further, I am, after all, writing about the internal consistency of the Christian God's philosophy, so I can't just arbitrarily toss out works that don't fit in with the others. I must rely on an objective metric for inclusion so as to avoid my own subjective bias. 
I will, however, partially agree that the Bible as a human collection is not divine, which is the crux of the issue at hand.  That means I need to be able to objectively establish what words are from those Scripture says can validly deliver Scripture. What follows, therefore, is an argument that establishes the core of what we know as the Bible as being valid Scripture; you'll find I have some quibbles about the New Testament at times. What it is not is an exhaustive treatise on authorship and the like; I do delve into that topic somewhat, but it is not my sole focus. Many compelling works concerning the authorship of the gospels and other books have been written. 
Second, what I am not discussing much of is the concept of translation. I always hear the tired old argument of "the Bible has been translated and retranslated so many times it's impossible to know what it said." To this, I can only scoff at someone who apparently can only parrot what they read on the internet. We have the manuscripts, usually from relatively close to their temporal origin, but certainly in their original language. So, I will brook no argument from this particular angle. A somewhat curious variation of this 'attack' is, "the fact there are hundreds of translations refutes the idea that the translation is simple or unambiguous." But if you think about it for a moment, this one assumes all translations have the same goal, which is simply not the case. Something like the ESV attempts to render a word-for-word translation, whereas the NIV goes for a more thought-for-thought approach. 
But all this is broadly moot regardless because we have the manuscripts in the original languages, and they can be checked at will for veracity. 
So, without further ado, let's start with the Old Testament. To Christians, the Old Testament is largely indisputable, sans the apocrypha which I'll get to, as Jesus Christ quoted a full twenty four of those books. In fact, the New Testament authors and Jesus quoted all but Ezra, Nehemiah, Esther, Ecclesiastes, and the Song of Solomon. Note, that doesn't mean these works aren't inspired, simply that they did not (apparently) say anything the authors needed to back up the particular messages we have on record. They were, however, definitively worthy of inclusion in the Bible, if you note a few other things. Jesus didn't just quote from the Old Testament, he said the following (Luke 24:44):
"Now He said to them, 'This is what I told you while I was still with you: Everything must be fulfilled that is written about me in the Law of Moses, the Prophets and the Psalms.'"

So Jesus right there, confirmed all of the Law books, all of the Prophets, and Psalms. But we need to take a step back. When I say the "law books," or "the prophets," how do I know Jesus was talking about the same ones that we have in our Bible, and not different ones? What about where he says "the Psalms"? This was used as a catch-all to refer to all of the Writings. Jews of Jesus' time lumped the books of the Old Testament into these same three categories, and Christ here is simply naming all three of them. ("The Psalms" included all those works not in the Law of Moses or the Prophets.) Jesus also confirmed much of the canon in Matthew 23:35. How? Well, he gives us the appropriate range of time in which prophets existed:
"And so upon you will come all the righteous blood that has been shed on earth, from the blood of righteous Abel to the blood of Zechariah son of Berekiah, whom you murdered between the temple and the altar."  

There are many other works that are touted as Scripture, and they are collectively known as the apocrypha. Here is a list of many works that are among the apocrypha (mind, this is the Old Testament apocrypha, there are similar works others believe belong in the New Testament):
1.	Tobit
2.	Judith
3.	1 Maccabees
4.	2 Maccabees
5.	Wisdom of Solomon
6.	Ecclesiasticus (Book of Sirach, or Ben Sira/Wisdom of Ben Sira)
7.	1 Esdras
8.	2 Esdras
9.	Baruch
10.	Letter/Epistle of Jeremiah
11.	Additions to Esther
12.	Prayer of Azariah
13.	Suzanna (often inserted as Daniel 13)
14.	Bel and the Dragon
15.	Prayer of Manasseh

Problems with these books include:
1.	No one in the New Testament quotes or references them.
2.	The Jews themselves did not classify any of them as Scripture.
3.	Literally one of the books of the Apocrypha itself says that there have been no real prophets in a long time (1 Maccabees 9:27): "There had not been such great distress in Israel since the time prophets ceased to appear among the people." There were roughly four hundred years of silence between the last prophet and Jesus, and a lot of these books were written in that time.

I can't really think of a better argument than those three. The people group literally charged with the preservation of the word of God didn't think they were inspired, nor did the books themselves. These books may be helpful or even accurate, but they are not inspired. 
Summarizing, Jesus mentioned the three categories the Jews were familiar with, and while on the subject did not take the time to identify any of them as being false works of false prophets. Then he gave us the appropriate timeframe in which there were real prophets, and a number of these works appear from outside that timeframe. Lastly, none of these works are quoted by any of the Apostles  or Christ that we know of, which while individually is not a fair reason for elimination… when coupled with the other arguments only adds to the pile. 
Next is the New Testament. The New Testament's canon was not decided at any council, let's get that out of the way now. People who don't know what they're talking about, and have never read any ancient author gleefully repeat this falsehood, often in an effort to undermine the character of Jesus by making it easier to worm in strange books about him cursing people to fall off roofs or getting drunk. In order to successfully deal with such works, it is necessary to start with the New Testament authors first, so we have a baseline for what legitimacy looks like. I am going to assume familiarity with names, like Peter and Paul. I don't want to be a spoil sport, but if you don't know who those men are, you should probably not be reading this chapter. You have far more basic questions you need answered, than getting bogged down here. But I digress, here is Jesus on Peter (Matthew 16:18–19):
"And I tell you that you are Peter, and on this rock I will build my church, and the gates of Hades will not overcome it. I will give you the keys of the kingdom of heaven; whatever you bind on earth will be bound in heaven, and whatever you loose on earth will be loosed in heaven."

And here's Peter calling Paul Scripture (emphasis added, 2 Peter 3:15–16):
"Bear in mind that our Lord's patience means salvation, just as our dear brother Paul also wrote you with the wisdom that God gave him. He writes the same way in all his letters, speaking in them of these matters. His letters contain some things that are hard to understand, which ignorant and unstable people distort, as they do the other Scriptures, to their own destruction."

Note, this isn't some oddball interpretation; the Greek word here is only used to refer to Old Testament Scripture in the New Testament (more than fifty times). It's used only for Paul, and the Old Testament. Peter puts Paul on the same level as the prophets. If you accept the gospel of Luke, Acts is its second part written by the same man, and it very clearly depicts Paul as an Apostle, accepted by the other Apostles. Ignatius and Polycarp, disciples of John the Apostle, likewise spoke of Paul as an Apostle, and the only way that is possible is if John the Apostle thought Paul was a real Apostle. So anyone who asserts that Paul was not a real apostle are claiming they know more about Paul than John, Peter, and Luke.
People don't typically attack Peter's authority on the whole, though, largely because of the above-quoted verse. They do, however, attack 2nd Peter quite frequently, saying it is a fabrication. Clement of Rome is a first century source, and Clement was called by Paul in Philippians 4:3 his "fellow worker," and in fact succeeded Peter as Bishop of Rome. 1 Clement chapter 23 (First Clement: Clement of Rome) quotes 2 Peter 3:4 as Scripture. We thus find that disputing 2nd Peter means disagreeing with someone who knew him and knew he wrote it! The next most common attack is around 2nd Peter's date: you find people saying that it was written far too late to be from Peter. Fortunately, we know Clement's document is pre 70 AD because he mentions the temple as still standing, which cements 2nd Peter's date as likewise pre-70 AD:
"Not in every place, brethren, are the daily sacrifices offered, or the peace-offerings, or the sin-offerings and the trespass-offerings, but in Jerusalem only. And even there they are not offered in any place, but only at the altar before the temple, that which is offered being first carefully examined by the high priest and the ministers already mentioned."
With Peter settled, and Paul established as an Apostle, here is Paul making it clear Luke was writing Scripture (1 Timothy 5:18):
"For Scripture says, 'Do not muzzle an ox while it is treading out the grain,' and 'The worker deserves his wages.'"

Paul quotes Moses and Luke in the same sentence, and calls them both Scripture.  I've heard people say "No, Paul is just calling the Deuteronomy verse Scripture and he happens to quote Luke afterwards." Here, let me add some emphasis to the verse to clear this up:
"For Scripture says, [Moses] and [Luke]." 
No identifying mark separating the two. Paul wasn't stupid. He was very careful with his word choice at all times. He quoted the exact Greek used by Luke, and did not separate it from the quote from Deuteronomy, but added to it (check the Greek if you feel so inclined). There is no reasonable, or even plausible, argument one can make for why he would not have done something incredibly simple and overt to separate the enlightened word of God from some dude's words. 
So, Peter, Paul, and Luke are all referenced as Scripture. That leaves us with James, Jude, Matthew, John, and Mark. Matthew and John were Apostles, which is its own justification (in terms of internal consistency). As Apostles, they had quite a level of authority; Luke 11:49,  for instance, places Apostles and prophets on the same level. As for the work that bears Matthew's name, Papias (Fragments of Papias)  referenced him directly, as did Irenaeus, making the authorship solid.  Mark is presumably the Mark referenced as a companion of Paul, and is as such someone Paul considered a faithful servant (Clement also references him as an author of a gospel).  Does that elevate his writing to the 'inspired' level? Unclear. But it bears going more in-depth on the authorship and dates of the gospels. Let's hear a detractor's viewpoint on this:
"The canonical gospels are all anonymous. The names we currently know them by were not attached to them until the late second century AD. The gospels themselves never name their authors and the earliest known references to them refer to them as anonymous works. Although there are apocryphal gospels that do actually claim to have been written by apostles, it is widely agreed among modern scholars that these gospels are all forgeries."
Oh my, if true, this would be very bad! A powerful attack indeed. Except, it's complete nonsense. Did you catch the fallacy of the majority? "Oh a lot of people think this so it's more likely to be true!" Nonsense, for reasons three seconds of critical thought can provide. If that were true, for a while there it would have been "more likely to be true" that the Sun went around the Earth because most people thought it so. 
Frankly, the majority of the arguments against the authorship-as-held for the New Testament are laughably stupid. I wish these weren't the same arguments people who have PhDs in this stuff use, but they are. Go read the Wikipedia entries on 'date' for the gospels, it's pretty ridiculous stuff. "Oh well, this Gospel tackles ideas popular in the 3rd century so it was written then." Jules Verne wrote about spaceships, so I suppose he was writing in the 1960s when they were popular? Nonsense! "Luke's theology is dissimilar to Paul's so he can't have been his companion!" So you aren't allowed to disagree with someone and be their friend? Nonsense! 
Anyways, let's start with Luke. Acts, also written by Luke, ends with Paul in prison, and does not record his execution; that would have been included if it had occurred already, which places the date of writing of Acts and Luke at least pre-70 AD. Luke noted, in Acts 11:28 a prophecy that was fulfilled:
"And one of them named Agabus stood up and foretold by the Spirit that there would be a great famine over all the world (this took place in the days of Claudius)."

He did not note that Christ's prediction of the destruction of Jerusalem was fulfilled in 70 AD. That limits the date of authorship to pre-70 AD. Many times in Acts, the author says "we" in reference to Paul. No reason has ever been advanced for this other than, "well the book was written in the 2nd century so obviously these are false insertions to enhance the credibility of the author." I doubt I need to tell you there's circular reasoning going on there. Paul mentions a number of gentile companions of his, but the most prominent of them are referred to in the 3rd person in Acts: Mark (12:12, 12:25, 15, 16, 17), Timothy (16:1, 16:3, several in 17, 18, 19, 20), Aristarchus (19:29, 20:4, 27:2), and Tychicus (20:4). Thus, these men are not the author. Luke is mentioned by Paul several times, notably in Colossians and Timothy. Again, though, there's no ancient source that says anyone but Luke wrote it. 

While Paul mentions several men, Aristarchus, Tychicus, Timothy, and Mark are mentioned in the third person within the text and so are ruled out as candidates for authorship of Acts. Of the remaining possibilities, the consensus of early Christian tradition points to Luke as the author of Luke-Acts. This is what was passed on by Irenaeus and Tertullian, and the earliest manuscript of this gospel has the inscription "According to Luke."  There are no early Christian traditions that attribute this gospel to anyone other than Luke, and the earliest manuscripts call it Luke's, and the earliest church references from Irenaeus and Tertullian call it Luke's. 
So… everybody from then that we have record of said "Yep, it's Luke's," and the arguments against it rely on dating it later than the text itself circumstantially dates itself. One such attempt says that "well, linguistically, the reference to eyewitnesses and 'from the beginning' in Luke 1:2 implies the distant past," but there is no definiteness in the Greek. 
I'm really trying to not sound overly dismissive of the arguments against authorship, but it's fairly hard to do when they're all so incredibly bad. Critical scholars never, in the attempts to confuse authorship I have seen, have a good answer for why everyone in the early church said "Yep it's Luke's," which is really where this should start, yeah? For instance, if I hand you a book and say "This guy named Lucas from my home town wrote this," and you go to my home town and everyone there says "Yeah Lucas wrote that, albeit a while ago," and then, someone comes along and says "This book wasn't written by anyone named Lucas, because [whatever]." This person has absolutely no answer to why I or the people in my home town say Lucas wrote the book.  Does that not instantly put their argument on terrible footing? I leave the question to you.
Let's do John next, though. Funnily enough, in order to disagree with the authorship of John, you have to, from the outset, assume that its author is lying. See from John 21:22-24:
"When Peter saw him, he asked, 'Lord, what about him?' Jesus answered, 'If I want him to remain alive until I return, what is that to you? You must follow me.' Because of this, the rumor spread among the believers that this disciple would not die. But Jesus did not say that he would not die; he only said, 'If I want him to remain alive until I return, what is that to you?' This is the disciple who testifies to these things and who wrote them down…"  

So the gospel itself points its authorship at John. Detractors must begin with "well the gospel is wrong," to have anything resembling a claim here. You can see the circular reasoning coming like a semi-truck at 2 am. The Rylands papyrus contains fragments from John 18, and it's from the 120s AD. The gospel was nearly certainly written sometime during John's life, thus, and his surviving companions, if not the man himself, would not have allowed such a document bearing his name to be circulated without disputing it. As far as the exact year, I couldn't say (I touched on the matter elsewhere in the book regardless). Polycarp, who I mentioned was a disciple of John the Apostle, taught Irenaeus, who said this: "John, the disciple of the Lord, who also had leaned upon His breast, did himself publish a Gospel during his residence at Ephesus in Asia."  The Anti-Marcionite Prologue, prologues written for each of the gospels, record that Papias, who knew John, was John's scribe. This is a little suspect, as the date for these prologues is 150-400 AD, so either "kinda close" or "uselessly postdated." The only thing in its favor as being genuine is part of the epilogue of John, John 21:24, note the 'we':
"This is the disciple who is bearing witness about these things, and who has written these things, and we know that his testimony is true."

That would lend credence to the fact that John used a scribe, or scribes, as the Anti-Marcionite Prologue states. This is a small yet very important detail for someone to have gotten right hundreds of years later! Frankly, the book itself says John the Apostle wrote it, so you either accept that or you don't, and then you reject the accuracy of Scripture itself and issues of authorship become trifles in comparison. Manuscripts such as 
I had a good argument about John with someone, who gave the following argument against his authorship in response to the above (summarized): "But John's gospel does not identify this beloved disciple or the one who Jesus loved as John the Apostle. The internal evidence is a little too good, don't you think, that he wrote it? Last, why does the beloved disciple only appear in John 13 and later, the last week of Jesus Christ's life? Also, isn't his Christology a little high for a fisherman?"
Ah, but it does identify him as such, in John 13:23, it says the author was reclining at Christ's side, thus, an Apostle. More certainly, John, since he, Peter, and James saw the transfiguration in Matthew 17, so it makes sense John would be right at Christ's side. Too good? Many verses indicate an intimate understanding of what occurred in Christ's inner circle. I have never received a good answer for what "good enough" would be that John wrote it instead of too good or not good enough. Subjective. The third objection, that of John's "high Christology," is an old and oft-repeated one. It too is dismissed as subjective; but I'll flip that around. If whoever wrote John, 1 John, 2 John, and 3 John wasn't an Apostle, who on earth were they? No one writes such deep theology except for the Apostles, so it would be fairly ridiculous to assume whoever did write them wasn't an extremely well known and influential author among the early church. Yet, we have no other texts that bear any similarity in style to these works.  It occurs to me I haven't touched on how we know John wrote the 3 letters attributed to him. There's ancient attestation to his authorship of the letters, and most everybody agrees all four works are written by the same person. So if John wrote the gospel… but of course, some disagree that they were written by the same person, because critical scholars need to eat and nobody pays them if they don't come up with something, right? So there are random quibbles over stylistic preferences which just… sure, fine, there are minor stylistic differences between a remembered description of the life and times of (who the author believed to be) the incarnate Christ and letters he wrote about theology. Ok? That's the best they've got? What a waste of time. You'd think if these guys were in the right and were getting paid to undermine Christianity and had centuries to think of and find ways to doubt the authorship of these works they could do better than, "uhh his writing is kinda different."
Matthew's authorship is up next. Matthew the Apostle himself was a tax collector, and it's curious that his gospel focuses on financial matters at the temple moreso than the others, no? Circumstantial I grant, but let's move on. I already touched on Matthew, but I didn't specify who this "Papias" was that I used to defend authorship of his gospel. Again, Papias said this: "Matthew put together the oracles [of the Lord] in the Hebrew style, and each one interpreted them as best he could." He lived from AD 60-130, bang on for the timeframe, and no ancient source doubts Matthew's authorship. Irenaeus, again, mentions Matthew as the author and gives information independent of what Papias said, meaning he had a different source for his information than Papias. Like Luke, nobody from the time period suggested Matthew didn't write it, and the manuscript's title, added no later than 125 AD, says Matthew wrote it. Also, since Matthew was a tax collector… he's unlikely to have been popular with the Jews, and he's not really mentioned that much in the New Testament, so if someone is going to forge a gospel intended for Jewish readership, they'd be unlikely to pick Matthew. 
The claims against it are, yet again, really weak in light of the information in support of it. I don't even think they're worth answering, but that won't be super convincing to anyone who doesn't live in my skull. And again, these are the arguments I've sought out and that have been used against me in debates. If I've missed one you consider "bulletproof for sure," I'm reachable. Get it to me and I'll add it below.
1.	If Matthew was an eye-witness to Christ's life and works, why did he use Mark as a source?
2.	Matthew couldn't have written such high-quality Greek.
3.	Mark and Luke call the tax collector "Levi", so why did Matthew change nothing about that event except to change the name "Levi" to Matthew (Luke 5:27, Mark 2:14, Matthew 9:9)? Both Matthew and Levi were Semitic names, so while it was common for persons in that era to have a Semitic and Greek name, two Semitic names was unusual.
4.	There are a couple notable contradictions between horizontal passages in Matthew and the other gospels that Matthew wouldn't have made if he were the author:
a.	Mark 5:22-24, Matthew 9:18-19. In Mark, Jauris' daughter isn't dead, in Matthew she is.
b.	Luke 3:23-38; Matthew 1:1-17. There are genealogical differences. 

1.	Have you ever told a story in collaboration with others? People highlight different parts of things, remember different things, and have their memory filled in by others. This is how humans tell stories of things they saw. What a circumstantial argument!
2.	Says who? Galilea was a bilingual area, and Matthew had to talk to a lot of different people given his position. There's reason enough to see he was bilingual. There is some reasonable contention about whether Matthew wrote the Greek gospel in his name, or someone close to him used his Hebrew work to make it. I have no opinion either way; it doesn't particularly matter, since the material is Matthew's.
3.	It is entirely possible that Christ gave Matthew his name, much as he did with Peter, or like what happened with Abram or Jacob who became Abraham and Israel, so there is cultural precedent, and Matthew means "gift of God". Further, the other two gospels do call him the Apostle Matthew in Luke 6 and Mark 3. Luke and Mark wrote the name Christ literally used; Matthew wrote who was called. 
4.	Let's see here. Note, I'm not particularly after resolving these "contradictions", which will happen as an aside, but moreso the differences between the gospels in these sections. 
a.	Mark gives us way more detail about the event than Matthew does. It's fairly irresponsible to hold a summary and a detailed description up as a "contradiction," but no matter. Mark says Jairus told Christ the daughter was at "the point of death", Matthew says "has just died". When you look at this, you go "hmmm, bad," but this is why we don't listen to people who only use the modern English version of the texts. Greek doesn't work the same way as English, and the word arti means "this instant, exactly now" or "something in process being finished even now". This is a difficult word to translate, and it is that translation issue that makes this look like a contradiction. But the structural point here is that Matthew is summarizing something, so he says the same thing as Mark in fewer words, and uses arti to convey the summarized concept. I don't find the fact that Matthew summarized a story Mark told in detail to be indicative of much of anything except focus preferences amongst the authors.
b.	When presented with this as evidence against Matthew's authorship, I didn't quite grasp how it mattered. It was explained that Matthew, a Jew, and specifically a record keeping tax collector, would not have missed people in the genealogy of Christ when the gentile doctor got it right. Curious indeed! But in fact, this is an extremely clever thing Matthew has done. Do you know who Matthew left out? He left out the false sons of David; Special Article F, in point of fact, is about one of the men Matthew left out, and how God spurned him. So, we find not that Matthew was a bad Jew, but that Matthew understood the nature of being a son of David more than most Christians today, and better than many Jews of the time. No wonder Christ called him from his booth.
Now for Mark, that I've also mentioned briefly. The funny thing is, critical scholars like to claim that Luke used Mark as a source, so if Luke was written in the 60s AD… Mark was written incredibly early. Eusebius, another early church father, did not like Papias, rather some of his theology, so we know when he quotes him it's more likely to be genuine. Here is Eusebius  quoting Papias about Mark:
"…also said this, 'Mark, being the interpreter of Peter, whatsoever he remembered he wrote accurately, but not however in the order that these things were spoken or done by our Lord. For he neither heard the Lord, nor followed him, but afterwards, as I said, he was with Peter, who did not make a complete account of the Lord's logia, but constructed his teachings according to chreiai. So Mark did nothing wrong in writing down single matters as he remembered them, for he gave special attention to one thing, of not passing by anything he heard, and not falsifying anything in these matters…'"
Mark thus has probably the best external witness of the gospels. I haven't found any interesting arguments against Mark's authorship and when told about Papias, people generally move on to other topics concerning Mark as opposed to his authorship. 
Also, one final point bears mentioning: compare the difference between Hebrews, an actual anonymous book, with these ones. We are still, to this day, openly debating the authorship of Hebrews! It's not like Christianity has papered over anonymous works in the canon; the one that is there is openly admitted, and the situation looks starkly different from what critical scholars claim about the gospels.
Off from the gospels we go. There's a bit more to say about James. In Galatians 2:9 he is called a "pillar" along with Peter and John, which may or may not imply Paul places his words on the same level as theirs; I'm unsure, but we at least know Paul considered him someone worth listening to if he's a 'pillar.' Galatians 1:19 likewise might be referring to James as an apostle. However, the wording is unclear; Paul says 'none of the other apostles, only James,' which may mean that he didn't see the apostles besides himself, but he saw James there, or he didn't see any apostles besides James. (The original text is, of course, similarly unclear.) Jesus appeared to James (1 Corinthians 15:7). Taken together, all three pieces of evidence put James as being worthy of inclusion.  As for authorship, the usual.  For what it's worth, we have some bona fide words of James from Acts 15:13-29, and textual analysis reveals it strongly resembles how the book of James is written. 
I see no clear evidence that Jude is of the same authority level as our top group. The book of 2nd Peter closely resembles Jude, so it's not exactly problematic that it is included. It seems to imply in verse 1:1 that the author is the brother of James, making him another half-brother of Jesus. The author does not seem to label themselves an Apostle (Jude 1:17):
"But you, beloved, remember the words which were spoken before by the apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ,"

But it is likely James edited the book, or helped with it. So it was most likely written under apostolic guidance, which somewhat explains its inclusion. The only other bit of evidence in its favor is this verse here, 1 Corinthians 9:5: "Don't we have the right to take a believing wife along with us, as do the other apostles and the Lord's brothers and Cephas"

This verse seems to place the (half) brothers of the Lord on the same footing as the Apostles and Peter, so that could very well elevate him. This book has the weakest footing of the canon, in my opinion. However, it does not fail the standards that exclude the vast majority of the apocrypha, and Jude being Christ's half-brother does lend him a certain standing… If I sound unsure about what conclusion to make, it's because I am: Jude offers sound advice, but is Jude Scripture? If pressed, I may say that Jude should be taken out, which may upset a rather large number of Christians who consider the Bible sacrosanct and not Scripture, but I don't see bold confirmation of or definite witness to it being Scripture from where I stand. I would thus argue you need to treat Jude with more suspicion than you do any other book of the Bible, or just rely on 2nd Peter since it contains most everything Jude says anyways.
Paul's got a lot of letters attributed to him. Romans, 1 & 2 Corinthians, Galatians, Ephesians, Philippians, Colossians, 1 & 2 Thessalonians, 1 & 2 Timothy, Titus, and Philemon. Shockingly, critical scholars actually just gave up and admitted the guy actually wrote Galatians, Romans, Philippians, Philemon, 1 & 2 Thessalonians, and 1 & 2 Corinthians. That leaves, by my reckoning, Timothy, Colossians, and Ephesians. Colossians they doubt because it has words not used by Paul, but it… says Timothy helped… so there's a rather easy explanation there don't you think? 
This is just not worth it, dear reader. The manuscripts all say Paul wrote these letters either by himself, or with a scribe, but he oversaw every word, and everyone in antiquity went "yep, Paul wrote them," so I frankly do not care what modern scholars say here, unless they have something good, which of course they don't. There's just no argument other than "uhh it's kinda written differently," which is subjective nonsense. Literally. Here is a quote from a scholar disputing these: "…these letters are from when the church's theological convictions and organizational needs had matured beyond what is presumed of the period in which Paul lived…" Presumed! Prove it! They don't, though, ever. They just say "well we think it would've been like this." This is an aside, but I really wish people would learn that just because you can come up with an objection, does not mean you have come up with a forceful objection, or supporting objection, or countermanding objection automatically, as in, one that outweighs the evidence for the opposite position. Since all the manuscripts support the traditional authorship, all the ancient sources support it, all the dating supports it… they resort to this kind of nonsense. So, Paul wrote these. All of them. He was an Apostle, and they are thus Scripture. Onward!  
What's left? Revelation? Hebrews? I've touched on Revelation previously in the book in terms of date, and the book says John wrote it, so if you doubt that, you doubt Scripture's accuracy and we have a bigger issue outside the intent of this chapter. Hebrews is thus last. People love to say that Hebrews is uninspired or apocryphal: yet all of the early churches placed this letter with the other Pauline epistles, and I see no reason to disagree with them. Eusebius, for instance, talks of Clement quoting it, showing that it wasn't a recent creation (recent to him, that is; he was writing several hundred years after the fact). Eusebius had this to say of it:
"Wherefore it has seemed reasonable to reckon it with the other writings of the apostle. For as Paul had written to the Hebrews in his native tongue, some say that the evangelist Luke, others that this Clement himself, translated the epistle." … "He says that the Epistle [an epistle is a letter, more or less] to the Hebrews is the work of Paul, and that it was written to the Hebrews in the Hebrew language; but that Luke translated it carefully and published it for the Greeks, and hence the same style of expression is found in this epistle and in the Acts. But he says that the words, Paul the apostle, were probably not prefixed, because, in sending it to the Hebrews, who were prejudiced and suspicious of him, he wisely did not wish to repel them at the very beginning by giving his name."
A biblical piece of evidence for this is that Peter, when writing to the Jews himself, mentioned that Paul had done the same in 2 Peter 3:15–16. So we have a Scriptural confirmation Paul did write to the Jews; but is it Hebrews? I see no reason to assume otherwise. Vague claims of "it doesn't read like something written x way" are not really particularly strong refutations, either, as I have been saying over and over and over in this section. Hebrews 2:3:
"how shall we escape if we neglect such a great salvation? It was declared at first by the Lord, and it was attested to us by those who heard,"

Seems to cast doubts on Pauline authorship, though, as Paul vehemently argued elsewhere in Galatians that he had no need of hearing from the Apostles since Christ appeared to him directly. So, in my view, the best answer is that Luke assisted Paul in writing it. Luke was never ashamed of using sources, as he said in his own gospel. See Hebrews 13:23:
"You should know that our brother Timothy has been released, with whom I shall see you if he comes soon."

We know, of course, Timothy knew both Luke and Paul and was Paul's companion, so this strengthens the case. The text shows an impressive understanding of the Old Testament, which strangely I see some using to doubt that Paul wrote it? Do they not know who Paul was before he became a Christian? He was a Pharisee, a great student of the law. He knew his stuff.
Now we get into the canon itself, the assemblage of the Bible. I'm not going to go into a whole lot about the people involved, and I'm going to run through it fairly quickly, because I'm not after what human tradition defends as worthy of inclusion. The whole point here is that of "who does Scripture say had the authority to write Scripture?" But it is nonetheless important to know how these works got to us, their provenance. Take it as a whirlwind big picture framework to get some things straight in your head to fill in if you do other research, or to compare against if you hear various claims being made. The conclusion, though, is this: as early as the second or third century we already had the canon assembled. Anyone who says anything different will not be able to refute the following.  
2.	The Murtorian Fragment (late 2nd century) attributed Acts to Luke, and Paul's letters were listed, among others. It alluded to Jude, left out 1st and 2nd Peter and 3rd John, and said the apocryphal Wisdom of Solomon was written by 'friends of Solomon in his honor.'
3.	Justin Martyr (110–165), in First Apology wrote that the writings of the apostles were read alongside the prophets in the Sunday assemble ("First Apology," 1:186). 
4.	Origen (185–254), a much lauded church father, wrote about Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John ("Church History of Eusebius," Chapter XXV:273) he also mentioned Paul and his writings, 1 Peter, 1 John, and Revelation. He listed 2 Peter and 2 and 3 John as disputed by some, but referenced the raising of Eutychus (Acts 20) as genuine. In Homilies on Joshua, he confirmed the twenty seven books of the New Testament (this can be found in homily 7). This was in 250 AD. Do note, if you go read the section, that Origen clearly included Hebrews as Pauline. 
5.	Eusebius (270–339), a historian of the church, wrote that Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John were undisputed. He added Acts and the works of Paul, 1 John, and 1 Peter. He labeled Hebrews, James, 2 Peter, 2 and 3 John, Jude and Revelation as disputed. 
6.	Athanasius (296–373) listed the canon as we know it as settled (Letter 39, section 5).
Books that were old, yet not as reliable, were removed, such as the Didache (as noted by Athanasius). 
Now we get to the New Testament apocrypha. These were often written too late, or too far away, to be seriously considered as inspired; they were sometimes written by the heretical branches of Christianity, such as the Gnostics. For instance, to demonstrate the scale of the problem, a man named Photius (9th century) listed about 280 apocryphal works. There are so many it is impossible to go through them all in a non-exhaustive treatise such as this. I'll present a general framework and cover some examples, though: I have never seen an apocryphal work that can attest to the following, like all of the books in the New Testament:
1.	Written at the appropriate time. As in, during the lifetimes of the people spoken about in verified Scripture. Remember that there were no more prophets after Jesus, so Apostolic authority was the only kind you could have, and when they died… it was all done. 
2.	Written in the appropriate geographic region(s).
3.	Verified as written by an Apostle or prophet, or under their close guidance.
Any single apocryphal book you present to me, I will show you how it violates at least two of these, generally all three. Often, they violate a fourth: they contradict other Scripture. This is perhaps the most damning critique for those of us inside the church. 
There were some, such as the Shepherd of Hermas, and 1 and 2 Corinthians from Clement, that were listed with the actual New Testament on occasion, but they were placed after Revelation, in the fashion of an appendix. Often, the authors themselves didn't try to claim the work as inspired (such as Polycarp to the Philippians). The fact is, they were written too late, and by non-Apostles and non-prophets.
The early fathers rejected many works out of hand, such as the Gospel of Thomas or the Infancy Gospel of Thomas, the latter of which wasn't even written until the second century. The latter is also refuted by John chapter 2:11: "What Jesus did here in Cana of Galilee was the first of the signs through which he revealed his glory; and his disciples believed in him."

If turning water into wine was Jesus' first sign, then one can hardly claim that he used his powers to curse children and others in his childhood. It's a Gnostic forgery, simple as that.
There is one book that requires more effort than the others, and is generally a more interesting path to being definitely labeled as apocryphal, and that is the Book of Enoch. However, this section is a brief overview, and spending pages in the main matter of the work on one liar's book is not my intent. Thus, if you are interested in the refutation itself, it is noted in the Special Articles section.    
I see the Early Church Fathers being used as weapons for nefarious agendas more and more these days. I am compelled to state: the Church Fathers were not perfect. Honestly, this is perhaps the greatest evidence to defend the claim that Scripture does not derive its authority from mere men; often, you will hear it said that Tertullian supported the book of Enoch, for instance. However, he said this in a work he wrote after he had fallen to Montanism, a heretical branch of Christianity. The words of a heretic mean scarcely little as to what is legitimate.
You should be incredibly careful when people make claims about what church fathers did or did not say. If a person does not give you the exact reference to a work so that you may find it yourself, I would assume they are lying about it. For example, I was once called by an FBI agent with regards to a case.  The agent called me and told me to call him back at the publicly available number for that field office, to verify that he was a real FBI agent, and more or less hung up. He provided a legitimate source for his claims, and you should ask the same of quotations from the church fathers. I see this most often with Origen's De Principiis  and this behavior is also rampant with his Contra Celsus, because in treating the extremely nonsensical and heretical arguments of a heretic named Celsus, he must repeat them; which means there are quotes of Origen "saying" certain heretical things, but then in the next breath refuting them. 
And that's pretty much it. If you trust Scripture, I hope you now have a stronger confidence in the works you hold dear. Except for Jude, anyways. Sorry, Jude.
EPILOGUE
You know, thinking back to my first chapter where I swore up and down that "oh this is the only chapter full of dense noggin nuggets," I think I lied. When I consider all the chapters of this book, none of them are particularly easy reading or lacking in winding arguments. If you're reading the epilogue, though, you must have read some great measure of the work's main body. So what's left? Why, when you look at the pages left, or if you have a digital copy the progress bar wherever the UI designer decided to throw it, does there seem to be so much left? Because there are still many issues left to cover, but that did not fit inside my main narrative. Christianity is a sweeping entity, and God is an all encompassing concept. The Special Articles cover some of those topics that are decidedly important, but not spinal in terms of importance to the faith. 
As the theologian Spurgeon once said, though – "It is God's word that saves souls, not our comment upon it, however correct that comment may be." I make no pretenses that Scripture has need of my commentary, or that I can add anything to it. Much like a rocket flying to the Moon, my explanation of the mechanics of that flight add nothing to the majesty of the flight itself. Where I have erred, this is my fault alone. 
And so, I will leave you with two verses, one warning, and one message of hope. You see, the world is increasingly becoming anti-Christian, especially in the West, whereas in other parts of the world we were already largely scorned and attacked. But our enemies are intermingled with those who can be saved; separating the two is difficult work. Every day, our enemies twist Scripture, trying to make it say what they want it to say. Every day, they stew on how to make it less urgent, less dependable, less applicable. Those who oppose Christianity have had 2,000 years to come up with arguments against it, and make no mistake: they are increasingly sophisticated attacks. Christianity itself makes great intellectual demands of its followers, and I firmly believe we must all rise to the occasion and understand our faith and be able to defend it.
Every day, something God declared evil, man declares righteous. You will be disliked for disagreeing with these things. It will seem like these are such petty things to lose friends or jobs over believing, and you may give up on them piecemeal. It may not seem worth it; you have a job, a life, what's getting into these discussions worth? But that is how we are swallowed: no one is swallowed whole; but piece by piece.
 Colossians 2:8:
"See to it that no one takes you captive by philosophy and empty deceit, according to human tradition, according to the elemental spirits of the world, and not according to Christ."

And an excerpt from 2 Corinthians 5:
"All this is from God, who reconciled us to himself through Christ and gave us the ministry of reconciliation: that God was reconciling the world to himself in Christ, not counting people's sins against them. And he has committed to us the message of reconciliation. We are therefore Christ's ambassadors, as though God were making his appeal through us. We implore you on Christ's behalf: Be reconciled to God. God made him who had no sin to be sin for us, so that in him we might become the righteousness of God."

Supposing that I should have the courage
To let a red sword of virtue
Plunge into my heart,
Letting to the weeds of the ground
My sinful blood,
What can you offer me?
A gardened castle?
A flowery kingdom?
What? A hope?
Then hence with your red sword of virtue.
Stephen Crane, The Black Riders and other Lines, XXX

Deep down, we don't believe that God is happy. 
And while normally I avoid making sweeping generalizations about my audience, I stand by the firm use of "we" there. Those readers who are Christians don't act like God is happy, and those who are not almost certainly don't. I don't mean that if asked, "Is God happy?" we couldn't produce some answer to the effect of "God is full of divine joy." Many chapters ago, I described the community of God, the three persons. Maybe you picture three swirling balls of light with fancy neon effects tracing around them. Or maybe you picture three kings seated on thrones. Who knows! But what I can very nearly guarantee is that you do not picture anybody doing anything resembling smiling or expressing happiness. So when I say, 'we don't believe that God is happy,' I mean, we don't remember God is happy, we act like the pagans of yore: "no other people had so much as contemplated that such a thing might be possible"  when confronted with the idea that God might make a covenant with human beings. Which is the point of this brief interlude: I want to bring to your attention some of the uniqueness of what first Judaism and now Christianity have brought to the world. 
I also don’t mean that God is exclusively happy or only happy. Of course not. He has many emotions (despite not being emotional). Further, I want to address something else: the modern world has adopted much of the gifts of Christianity, but has forgotten or scorned the giver of those gifts. When Paul wrote Galatians, or when he wrote Philemon, the world and its assumptions were vastly different. Today, though the fight in practical terms is not over, most cultures take for granted that all people have inherent worth. Where do you think that came from? The natural progression of man's philosophy as he became richer and fatter? No. The richest, the fattest, the Romans and the Greeks, the Persians, the Han, Mansa Musa’s Mali, they thought that a person's worth was the weight of gold and land and slaves they possessed. If you study the Greek philosophers especially, you find this idea, in say The Republic or Gorgias that inflicting suffering on another is not wrong because it is an injustice to another, but for what it does to your soul. I won't go into a long digression on the Stoics or whoever else's ideas of virtue, good, bad, indifference, et cetera as they relate to worth; there simply was no conception of human beings as having intrinsic value or worth (perhaps something like axia in the Greek, but it does not mean value the way I intend it). 
In Asia Minor, Buddhists have occasionally allowed for some intrinsic dignity, but in a sense of acquired dignity, our ability to discern and choose right and wrong given our privileged status of comprehending morality: your 'capacity for enlightenment' as it has been put by some modern interpreters. However, if we look at the early Buddhist schools, we find that one's worth is in fact tied to the amount of enlightenment they have attained, not their 'capacity' for it: "it would be even more fruitful if one would feed a single arahant [one with insight]. As great as the brahmin Velāma's alms offering was, and though one would feed a hundred arahants, it would be even more fruitful if one would feed a single paccekabuddha [a solitary buddha who has achieved enlightenment]. As great as the brahmin Velāma's alms offering was, and though one would feed a hundred paccekabuddhas, it would be even more fruitful if one would feed a single Perfectly Enlightened Buddha…" 
Confucius, I have read much, but saw little that was more than the standard virtue-ethic type idealism typical of non-Christian cultures; there are many references to virtue and character, and the 'superior man' is superior in his virtue. Of course, there are many possible meanings of 'superior,' it seems to me most likely this references 'righteous superiority' as opposed to some statement about individual worth. This quote though: "A youth is to be regarded with respect. How do we know that his future will not be equal to our present? If he reach the age of forty or fifty, and has not made himself heard of, then indeed he will not be worth being regarded with respect." Implies to me much similarity with the Greek philosophers, and matches up with the other cultural views previously examined.
I have attempted to research the issue in South American religions, such as the polytheism of the Olmecs, Aztecs, and Incas, with little success, as well as those of Africa or classical Shintoism in Japan (which is less of a religion to begin with, and of course has no authoritative classical text to turn to). Generally though, where I have found information on the matter in polytheistic or animist traditions, the answer is a resounding "no." I cannot, of course, say it never arose elsewhere, but if we examine the states of such cultures at the time they were encountered by Christianity or Judaism, it had never become an accepted and dominating cultural idea anywhere else. 
I don't intend to treat all the various cultural advances brought about by Christianity; I leave it to you to consider cultural ideals before Christianity and their ideals today, and draw your own conclusions; that did not happen by accident. Taking care of the poor, the idea that a slave was just as worthy as a rich man… as Tom Holland, an atheist by the way, wrote in Dominion, "[Paul's] was a conception of law that would come to suffuse an entire civilization." 
He further said, "Paul, by proclaiming the body 'a temple of the Holy Spirit', … was also giving to those who serviced [men of Rome and Corinth], the bar girls and the painted boys in brothels, the slaves used without compunction by their masters, a glimpse of salvation. … If all were equally redeemed by Christ, if all were equally beloved of God, then what of the hierarchies on which the functioning of even the humblest Roman household depended?"
Yet more, he said, "The gods cared nothing for the poor. … The heroes of the Iliad, favorites of the gods, golden and predatory, had scorned the weak and downtrodden. So too … had philosophers. Only fellow citizens of good character who, through no fault of their own, had fallen on evil days might conceivably merit assistance." 
	I don't particularly expect this to be a convincing argument, as it is essentially saying "You owe the very ethics you attack Christianity with, to Christianity," which I don't often find much disagreement with to begin with. The reply is usually, "And now we do them better, and want Christianity to get rid of those things that have fallen behind our continued moral development. Polytheism gave way to monotheism which gives way to atheism." (Or as I would quip, selfism and dollarism, but those twin threads have always been in the braid of mankind's ethical hairdo.)
	I would argue, though, that the modern world's ethics are, in essence, designed to make you feel at home here. Argue with a man who butchers animals painfully, and he’ll say that’s how it happens in nature. …And in many cases, so are those of 'churches.' Granted, there are a lot of sources of antagonism against the church that are not fair. When the church does anything wrong, it is headline news. But nobody sees the homeless shelter run by the sixty year old elder of the church, working to get those who show up jobs and food and some human company. Nobody sees the free groceries stall every Tuesday. 
	But many false 'churches' do exist, and they do things like sell signed Bibles. Signed. By who? Some, by American politicians, some by the pastor. There are other 'churches' that have sold out to fill seats, offering a small music concert, then some fellow tells you it's ok you're constantly breaking God's commands and making no effort to change who you are, as long as you've accepted Christ into your heart all is forgiven. These fools have sold themselves, and I do believe most of them genuinely think that's how Christianity works, on the lie that God expects nothing of you but emotional repentance every now and again. That you can forget God daily or for weeks at a time. True! You can always run back to God. But being a Christian is being part of God's family; is what I have described the actions of someone who is genuine about wanting to be part of a family?
	The fool's response here is that Christ was all about inclusivity; and sure, to a point: he ate with sinners. But here's what this crowd glosses over or doesn't recognize: everybody at that table knew they were a sinner, and knew Christ knew it, and knew they needed help. Today's crowd wields this very differently. They want to sit at that table exactly as they are and feel no need to change. As I have said before, and as Scripture warns severely, Christians must approach the sin of others with incredible humility. But we must still approach it. Love is defined for us in 1 Corinthians 13:
“Love is patient and kind; love does not envy or boast; it is not arrogant or rude. It does not insist on its own way; it is not irritable or resentful; it does not rejoice at wrongdoing, but rejoices with the truth. Love bears all things, believes all things, hopes all things, endures all things. Love never ends.”

So with that in mind, and also bearing all the Scripture that says we are to love our neighbor, and all the other Scripture that discusses dealing with sin humbly, we are called to hate sin and told God approves when we hate it. (Psalm 119:163, 119:104, 97:10, 45:7… etc.)
Hating sin is fully approved of. What we are not to do is condemn others, but to tell them where we, fellow blind beggars, found light and bread. And warn them of what happens to rebels who persist in their way. Loving your neighbor does not mean pretending their actions are not sinful, it does not mean not telling them they are sinning. It is very clear on how you are supposed to go about those things, yes: humbly and with love. It’s a fine line!
Do we think we’re better? Absolutely not. I would carve my tongue out before I said I was better than anyone else. I have on Christ’s robes, and that’s the only thing that keeps me from the cold.
Nor is my job to force my view on anyone.
	When the supposed Christian dies, and they stand before the great white throne, I imagine Jesus may ask this question: "When faced with moral dilemmas, whose counsel did you first turn to?" The Christian will easily and swiftly answer, "Scripture, yours." The goat, the unknown person, will not be able to say that. They will say a great many things, I imagine, but it will not be that. No, the supposed Christian has forgotten that Christ is both Savior and Lord. What knight of the realm never asks their King for guidance on what to do, and expects to be paid for services rendered? So it goes with Christians, I assume. Take the issue of abortion, for instance. From where have you formed your opinion on the matter? Friends? News articles? Random websites like Facebook posts or Reddit? Perhaps you thought long and hard about the issue and made a decision 'on your own'? 	This is something all Christians struggle with, I assure you, but every time I find a moral quandary, I strive to first ask, "What has my King said about this matter?"
	But I called this an interlude on joy. What have I discussed thus far? God’s happiness? The moral benefits of Christianity? False teachers? How to love our neighbor? Succinctly, these are talking about how knowing the truth brings us closer to God, who brings us joy. The fall of barbarism, given that we still have barbaric cultures today, is not guaranteed. The road to joy is likewise lined with people and their creations seeking to turn you aside from God’s storehouse and harvest you for their own benefit. 
	That’s a bit preachier than I aim to be here, oh well. Really, this interlude is about the effect of Christianity, actual Christianity, not the people who claim to be one and then command from the gospel of self. We all have a different picture of who that is. In aggregate, it’s hard to be a non-believer. Hopelessness, a breakdown of community… you know, Christianity answers the question, “is your neighbor worth loving?” It says “in all circumstances, yes.” (With obvious caveats, the Mongol trying to kill your daughter… pick up a sword.)
	It says you have dignity. It says you should have compassion, and it teaches how. It says you should care, and it models how. And it does this from a place of supreme knowledge of the human condition, and its author has had to endure the worst of our behavior and still come out of it whole. 
	How many times will you read this in your life: “this person grew up religious, but as their faith clashed with their understanding of the outside world…” And on and on. Yes, I’m sure it did. The place of darkness often differs from the place of light.
 

Special Articles

The Special Articles are more than an appendix. They are additional content that may not be referenced in the main body of the work at all, and they dive in without too much preamble, since the goal is to be a short answer to whatever the issue under consideration is. Read them in any order; they are not summative by nature. Typically, they cover material that is important, yet tangential, to the main order of important information this work exists to defend. Likewise, they are not exhaustive treatises of their topic, but overview arguments. They assume a general familiarity with Christianity, so I would not start with these. (They do not necessarily assume familiarity with the content of this work, however.)



Special Article A - Daniel's Lesser Prophecies
The Book of Daniel contains the amazing prophecy concerning Christ's death that is described in the main work, but it also contains another grand prophecy that is worth discussing. You know, it's ironic: ever since AD 200 or thereabouts, doubters have been saying that Daniel must have been written after the fact, long after Alexander the Great's time; there can be no way, they say, that a man could know what was going to happen with such accuracy. Indeed. But I'm getting ahead of myself, what is the other prophecy? There are a couple prophecies in Daniel that aren't the big one, such as in Daniel 2 where Daniel predicts four successive, powerful empires; of course, we know these as the present (to Daniel) Babylonian empire, then the Medo-Persians, then the Greeks, and finally the Roman empire. Then there's the one in Daniel 8, whereby Daniel relates what would happen with Alexander the Great. Daniel 8:8 talks about his untimely death, and his replacement by four new kingdoms who wouldn't have his power: we know of course that this is exactly what happened. So, this was around 250 years before Alexander; pretty impressive, no?
I heard a scholar of some repute talk about Daniel, and he summed it up with (lightly paraphrased, it has been a number of years): "Of course, the main way we know that Daniel was written after the fact is the simple truth that men do not have visions of the future."
If you fall into that camp, I have nothing for you, but for you to remember Daniel's prophetic prediction of the very month Jesus would die and its indisputability and its accuracy, and give that a good, hard think. However, if you are of a not-so-closed minded nature, and find a man telling the future with such exacting detail to not be a problem with sufficient defense, then let's go on. Below I go through the main arguments I've heard against Daniel as a whole. 
Many issues concerning Daniel have been resolved by archeology; one claim is that Daniel's three years of training before entering the king's service, and Daniel 2's claim that it was set during the 'second year of Nebuchadnezzar's reign', was impossible. However, with the discovery of the Nabonidus Chronicle and the Gezer Calendar, we know now that there is no issue of years. The Chronicle is an inscription by a king who lived around 553–539, and the Gezer Calendar is dated to king Rehoboam (922–905). These detail, together, that a king took his first full year as his accession year, and started the count for his own reign as the beginning of the next.
To make a long and boring story of calendars short, Daniel 1:1 claims that Nebuchadnezzar took Jerusalem in the "third year of the reign of Jehoiakim": roughly 606 to 605 (see Jeremiah 46:2, there's a story here about the Nisan calendar and all that). Nebuchadnezzar succeeded his father in 605, so his accession year was from 605 to 604, his first year 604 to 603, and his second, therefore, would be 603 to 602. Daniel was captured when the siege was undertaken, and ended in 602. Fancy how that lines up, huh? Fancy how Daniel somehow had an intricate understanding of Babylonian court records, and yet he was supposedly a Hebrew writing some 400 years after the fact, indeed!
It is often claimed that the Prayer of Nabonidus, a much older story, was turned into Nebuchadnezzar's story in Daniel 4. There were three supposed similarities, one of which was discovered to be an outright falsehood (the 7 years Nabonidus spent disturbed was actually 10, and Nabonidus had a skin condition, not madness.) Thus only literary connections between these two stories are common things: it's like if one story said "and they lived happily forever after," and so did another, and someone went "see look it's plagiarism!" In a word, this is nonsense. Being afflicted by God is a staple of ancient literature, and a foreigner magician being there is only a 'similarity' in the same way that Gandalf and Ben Kenobi were both old warriors of the light who died fighting an evil black thing while the hero watched. You have to squint awfully hard to make it work. Hard enough to call it "disingenuous."
Fourth, did Darius the Mede exist? This was a thorn in the side of Prophetic Daniel believers for quite some time: there was no evidence of him. However, much like atheists once claimed that Sargon the Great's kingdom didn't exist as a way to invalidate the Bible, and then we found the bloody capital city out in the desert… all it took was time. A writer named Steven Anderson used Xenophon's Cyropaedia, a biography of Cyrus the Great, to argue that Cyrus shared power with a Mede called Cyaxares II.
To summarize, Cyaxares II became, after the fall of Babylon, the king of the Medo-Persian empire, and Cyrus was subordinate to him. Next, we have the Babyloniaca, written by a priest named Berossus, who directly references "Darius the king" in companion with Cyrus. We come to the question, then: who could this Darius be? Well, given Xenophon's account… we have but one person. Cyaxares II. Since he was the King of Media, one finds it to be a very small leap to see him called "Darius the Mede."
Josephus also says this: "Now Darius put an end to the dominion of the Babylonians with Cyrus his relative… who was the son of Astyages…" Xenophon identified that son as as Cyaxares II. It's inescapable that Darius the Mede was real. A Greek named Harpocration also tells us there were two Dariuses, not just Darius the Great: he tells us that a coin called the Daric was not named for the father of Xerxes (Darius the Great), but a "certain other more ancient king."
What about Belshazzar and Nebuchadnezzar? Ah this one is my favorite, actually. Scholars swore up, down, and sideways that Belshazzar straight up didn't exist until fairly recently, until the discovery of the Haran steles. These confirmed that he existed and was king. I just like reminding atheist scholars of this, that "the absence of evidence is not the evidence of absence."
But more to the point, scholars decry Daniel being the 'third highest ruler' (Daniel 5:29). How could this be? It doesn't make sense they say: unfortunately, Daniel should have been the second highest ruler in the kingdom, if Belshazzar was king! But, those pesky Haran steles tell us that Nabonidus was king in absentia, and thus first, making Belshazzar second, and Daniel… third. Honestly, this is grand evidence for Daniel, as unless someone who was making this up knew these precise details, they would have also said Daniel was second, like everyone assumed he should have been, until we got those steles.
There's a great deal of discussion to be had about the language in Daniel, but really, if you're at the point where you're going "nuh uh they didn't have those loan words in their language at that year," you're… reaching. We can hardly tell when loan words enter language in modernity, let alone in the 500s BC. 
Did Daniel even exist? And here we come to it. What about the supposed author himself, Daniel? Who was he? It's claimed he's not mentioned until 140 BC, unless of course you count the book of Ezekiel which names him directly, three times (14:14,20, and 28:3). Those who argue this Daniel is not that Daniel fail to recognize the similarity between Job, Noah, and Daniel as cited in the first two verses; their trust in God, despite residing in foreign lands, they were saved by their righteousness (mentioned by Ezekiel himself in 14:20)… and so on.
Also, when detractors try to claim that this Daniel is actually 'Dn'il', an Ugaritic folk legend, they fail to recognize that Dn'il was a Baal worshipper, who Ezekiel would not have said was saved by his righteousness. Given that Ezekiel was writing in the 570s, one can rather easily say that Daniel had become famous in the intervening 30 year period and so he was freshly upon Ezekiel's mind. As there is no other Daniel who fits this pattern, and it makes enormous sense for Ezekiel to be referencing a Daniel who had become famous and important a mere thirty years prior… one can only reasonably conclude that he is speaking of that Daniel.
And so we come to the end. Daniel knew far too much about the sixth century to not have been from it; he described the city of Susa accurately (8:2). This includes the discovery at Ur by the archeologist Leonard Woolley, which confirms the gold statue and rites described towards the beginning of Daniel 3, as a marked departure from the typical religious practices of that time and place - something you really couldn't know occurred hundreds of years after the fact. But I digress, he just can't have gotten it all so very right before it happened, because that would imply he really was a prophet, and well, we just can't have that in our world where men can't tell the future with God's help, can we?
Oh, lastly, about one of Daniels' prophecies, a common argument is that Daniel 11:40–45 didn't happen in the time of Antiochus IV Epiphanes. This would be bad, if there were not a paragraph differentiation between Daniel 11:35 and Daniel 11:36. Daniel 35 even says "until the time of the end, for it will still come at the appointed time" - which hints to the reader that what comes next is going to be about. No one doubts that Antiochus IV is the king in Daniel 11:28, but I do want the people who make this claim to reconcile Antiochus IV being the King of the North with this, Daniel 11:40:
"At the time of the end the king of the South will engage him in battle, and the king of the North will storm out against him with chariots and cavalry and a great fleet of ships. He will invade many countries and sweep through them like a flood…" 

Notice anything… odd? Perhaps that the King of the North is supposed to be ranging against Antiochus IV, but wait, Antiochus IV is the King of the North, right? Wrong, at least in this section. It's fairly well obvious that it's two different time periods given these two pieces of information.
But that's the end of that. 

Special Article B - the Book of Enoch
The book of Enoch is probably the single book of the apocrypha that demands being thoroughly dismantled. If you're coming here from the chapter on "how we got the bible," I gave a few criteria for how you can easily dismiss many of the apocrypha for the New Testament. But I feel that I should do one in detail, and so I have chosen the Book of Enoch. I also hear it talked about a lot more than most of the others, so it doubly suits my purpose.
The first main problem with the book of Enoch is that there are zero manuscripts of it from the time it was supposedly written, or indeed before the 2nd century BC. I'll go through some info about it and then towards the bottom describe some doctrinal issues it presents, as it says things which go against the rest of Scripture. But first, some say that Jude 14–15 quotes Enoch, so let's see if that's the case.
Here's 1 Enoch 1:9:
"And behold! He cometh with ten thousands of His holy ones to execute judgment upon all, and to destroy all the ungodly: and to convict all flesh of all the works of their ungodliness which they have ungodly committed, and of all the hard things which ungodly sinners have spoken against Him."
And then Jude 1:14-15:
"Now Enoch, the seventh from Adam, prophesied about these men also, saying, 'Behold, the Lord comes with ten thousands of His saints, to execute judgment on all, to convict all who are ungodly among them of all their ungodly deeds which they have committed in an ungodly way, and of all the harsh things which ungodly sinners have spoken against Him.'"

This appears at first glance to be fairly convincing, yes? Three problems.
One, plenty of texts are quoted in the Bible that are not canonical in their totality, such as the references to the Book of Jasher recorded in Joshua 10:13 and 2 Samuel 1:18; their inclusion means that the part referenced and quoted is Scripture, but the rest of the work is not. So the mere quotation of a work does not, in and of itself, make a whole work Scripture.
As for the second reason, the word used in Jude, that 'prophesied' there, is prophéteuó. Its cognate, prophetes, was used in Titus 1:12 to refer to a heathen poet, and the word itself is only used as a citation once in Matthew 15:7 to cite Isaiah 29. Indeed, in that same section of Titus, Paul asserts that the pagan he is quoting is correct, even; yet this does not mean the poet's words in total bear inclusion as Scripture.
Third, it is entirely possible that Jude is referring to a real prophecy by Enoch… that is not from this book of Enoch. Oral traditions are powerful, and considering the care with which the Jews recorded information, it is plausible it survived. Notice the curious differences between the two. The book of Enoch says that the righteous were destroyed whereas Jude says they were judged. I don't know of any New Testament citation of Scripture that misquotes its source material. Also, Jude is careful to say that Enoch prophesied; it does not say that it quotes from the book of Enoch.
Given those bits of information, there is no evidence that Jude is referring to the work as inspired. But let's continue. At best, assuming it was written pre-Jude, the Book of Enoch is inter-testamental, meaning it was written down between the conclusion of the Old Testament and the beginning of the New Testament, and therefore could not be an inspired work.
Note that there is absolutely no evidence whatsoever that Noah's great-grandfather Enoch actually wrote this, or that it was passed down to be written inter-testamental as oral tradition. Absolutely none, especially considering the Jews stopped only orally transmitting things as important as prophetic words literally thousands of years before. Likewise, they never included it in their canon. Some argue that certain Aramaic sections of the fragments we have for the book of Enoch 'seem' quite old, but something 'seeming' a certain way isn't even good enough for a traffic ticket, so it certainly isn't a standard I will use here.
I will quote a scholar on it here as well:
"This pseudepigraph has evoked divergent opinions; but today there is a consensus that the book is a composite, portions of which are clearly pre-Christian as demonstrated by the discovery of Aramaic and Hebrew fragments from four of the five sections of the book among the Dead Sea Scrolls. One of these fragments, moreover, was copied in the second half of the second century B.C. The main question concerns the date of the second section, chapters 37-71, which contains the Son of Man sayings. J. T. Milik (esp. no. 755) has shown that this section, which is not represented among the early fragments, is probably a later addition to 1 Enoch; but his contention that it was composed around A.D. 270 (no. 755, p. 377) is very speculative. If, as most specialists concur, the early portions of 1 Enoch date from the first half of the second century B.C., chapters 37-71 could have been added in the first century B.C. or first century A.D. The original language of 1 Enoch appears to be Aramaic, except for the Noah traditions, which were probably composed in Hebrew." (The Pseudepigrapha and Modern Research, p. 98)
That about sums it up. The Book of Enoch has multiple authors, is from multiple time periods, and is of dubious at best provenance (and providence). It was certainly not written by Enoch, and often, when a book claims some well-known and ancient personage as its author in order to lend itself legitimacy… one finds that it is the precise opposite of legitimate.
Also, just go read the thing and it will become immediately apparent why it is not worthy of inclusion. Here's an overview of Enoch. (Introduction to the Intertestamental Period, pp. 142-143):
"The book was arranged by its last editor in five sections, as in the Psalms and other Jewish Books.
Section I (1-36) is mainly concerned with pronouncing God's judgment by Enoch on the angels, or watchers who fell through their love for the daughters of men (Gen. 6:1-4), and Enoch's intercession for them. A weird description of Hades is found in this portion of 1 Enoch.
Section II (37-71) has three 'parables,' or apocalyptic revelations, together with the story of Enoch's translation into heaven.
Section III (72-87) is primarily concerned with furnishing a treatise on astronomy, the secrets of the movement of the stars as revealed to Enoch, who sees with his own eyes their very course, even the portals through which they enter and issue forth, for the purpose of transmitting the information to future generations.
Section IV runs along lines laid down in the first two portions dealing with the problem of sin and suffering of Israel. Enoch relates to Methuselah his visions of the deluge, the fall of the angels, and their punishment in the underworld, the deliverance of Noah, the Exodus, the giving of the Law, the conquest of Canaan, the time of the judges, the establishment of the united kingdom, the building of the temple, the story of the two kingdoms, the fall of the Northern Kingdom, and the Exile. This is followed by four periods of angelic rule up to the time of the Maccabean Revolt, the last assault of the Gentiles, and the great Judgment. The last part of Section IV contains the prediction of the foundation of the new Jerusalem, the conversion of the Gentiles, the resurrection of the righteous, and the coming of the Messiah.
Section V is without any account of the origin of sin but seems to be mainly devoted to the problem of suffering of the righteous and the prosperity of the oppressing sinners. It denounces evil and utters woes on sinners and promises blessings to the righteous. Within Section V is an older work 'The Apocalypse of Weeks' (93:1-10; 91:12-19). It concludes (105): 'In those days the Lord bade to summon and testify to the children of the earth concerning their wisdom: show (it) unto them; for ye are their guides, and a recompense over the world. For I and My Son will be united with them forever in the paths of uprightness and in their lives; and ye shall have peace; rejoice, ye children of uprightness. Amen.'"
(End of the quote from Introduction to the Intertestamental Period, pp. 142-143.) As you can see, the book offers 'visions' of history with great accuracy; considering my own work detailing the prophecies in Daniel, I know the Bible is capable of such, but the book overdoes it. If it were truly of Enoch, if it were truly that old, a New Testament author would have quoted such a monumental prophecy, or like how Ezekiel quoted the famous Daniel, Enoch's prophecies would have been quoted. Seriously, it presents an exact roadmap of Israel's history; they would've referred to it as "it's ok, see God foresaw this and he's got it." This is what fake, after the fact prophecy looks like. 
There is also the issue of the periods of Angelic Rule listed there (68-71, and elsewhere), which does not mesh with the history laid out in the rest of the Old Testament. We're told one time that an angel guards Israel, so the relevant important acts of angels are reliably reported in the Old Testament. Never are periods of angelic rule mentioned.
And now on to some of the things it says which are not Scriptural:
1.	'Verse' 10:15 on to about chapter 11 details that after the deluge, righteousness would be restored and evil would be eliminated. This contradicts the Old Testament, it contradicts the New Testament… really everything.
2.	Enoch 2:2-3 contradicts 2 Pet 3:3-7; it says that things have been going on in the same way since the beginning of creation, which is literally an argument 2 Peter warns about.
3.	10:8 places the blame for all the fallen angels on some angel named Azazel, which is not Scriptural.
4.	Chapter 20 incorrectly assigns the roles of both Gabriel and Michael.
5.	41 calls the Kingdom of God divided. This contradicts Jesus and the rest of Scripture.
6.	47:4 says God requires the blood of the righteous, which is purely wrong. It isn't discussing the blood of the righteous one, mind, but all righteous, an offering of a 'number' of them.
7.	In general, Enoch details, well, Enoch going down to Earth after being taken up by God, and that's not supported by the rest of Scripture. It's not precisely rejected, but no one else that God took made a habit of coming back.
Seriously just go read it for yourself. It's very odd, and not in an Ezekiel kind of way: Ezekiel is odd because he's describing with words things neither he nor we understand. It's like a blind man trying to describe color. Enoch is odd for the same reason some of the gnostic works talking about Jesus are odd; it tries too hard to mimic that which it is not.
 I hear frequently that the Early Church Fathers supported Enoch. The list is always very impressive; they cite Tertullian and Origen most often. Tertullian was a fan, calling it Scripture in Book 1, Chapter 3 of On the Apparel of Women. However, we must take care to remember that the Early Church Fathers are not the authority on what is Scripture, while their argument is supportive, they were fallible. Tertullian fell, in his later life, to Montanism, a heretical branch of Christianity, and On the Apparel of Women was most likely written after this fall; so one should treat the words within with great suspicion.
So what about Origen? Origen cites it in the same breath as the Psalms (although he mis-translates the Psalm he's quoting) in De Principiis IV. However, the passages from Enoch he cites do not appear in the version we have. Origen mentions the Book of Enoch another time, in Contra Celsus, LIV. He doesn't quote it there, however, nor does he call it Scripture. It would appear that he considered it a useful book, but there is no evidence that he thought it was Scripture. Especially when you consider what I am about to relate.
Be very careful when reading articles claiming what the Early Church Fathers did or did not say. I all too often see people butcher their quotes, cut out entire blocks of text, or outright lie about the content of their works or what they support. I found at least three different articles about Origen on Enoch that completely lied about the contents of De Principiis or Contra Celsus in an effort to support Enoch. If someone does not give you at the very least the book and chapter to go find it yourself, assume their quotation is a lie. For instance, I read several times people "quoting" De Principiis 3:3, saying that it supported the Book of Enoch as Scripture. Do you know what Origen was doing in that section? He was discussing heretics who said God created the Holy Spirit, and that it did not exist eternally as God. But because he said the word "Scripture" within the same paragraph as "book of Enoch," he must therefore be discussing it as Scripture, right? No. Absolute nonsense. The paragraph, if anything, supports the notion that Origen separated Enoch from Scripture. See here:
"And in the book of Enoch also we have similar descriptions. But up to the present time we have been able to find no statement in holy Scripture in which the Holy Spirit could be said to be made or created…"
You tell me. Is Origen supporting Enoch as Scripture? No. He's intentionally separating it. He puts Enoch closer to something written by Hermas than Scripture (which was recognized even as early as the Muratorian Fragment, mentioned earlier, as non-Scriptural). The Muratorian Canon refutation is noted in Bart Ehrman, Lost Scriptures (Oxford University Press, 2003) page 333.

Special Article C - The Tribe of Christ
Is the narrative of Christ consistent throughout the Bible? I have claimed that God knew about Jesus from the beginning; if that was true, one would expect him to show up throughout the Old Testament as well. As I've said a few times about various topics, there have been entire books written about the subject, but I want to laser in on one specific example, Christ's tribe. Turning to Matthew, we see in verse 3 of chapter 1 that of Jacob's children, he comes from Judah, and later on, from the line of King David. (And while I generally prefer Luke, Matthew has the more legible genealogy, but the same information is conveyed in Luke 3:33.)
Here in Hebrews 7:14 we see this stated directly:
"For it is clear that our Lord descended from Judah,"

So let us see if we can find any foretelling of Christ in Judah himself. I believe we find it in Genesis chapter 44. This is in the midst of the story of Joseph, the son of Jacob (Jacob was more importantly known as Israel, bear that in mind as we wonder why Jesus came from Judah, Israel's son), who was betrayed by his brothers.
We are at the scene where Joseph has decided to put the silver cup in the sack of the youngest of the brothers (Genesis 44:2). He then ensures that this brother, Benjamin, is caught with the silver cup. The brothers plead for mercy, contending their innocence, but Joseph tells them that only the "guilty" brother will become his slave. So Joseph is preparing to take Benjamin as his slave, and the brothers are undoubtedly anxious to prevent it. But, then, this happens - this is the really, really important bit:
Judah, another of Jacob/Israel's sons, goes up to Joseph, and tells him that his father said of Benjamin, "If … harm happens to him, you will bring down my gray hairs in evil to Sheol.'"
So he's telling Joseph that if this youngest brother dies, their father will die as well. So Judah delivers this all-important line. Remember, all of the brothers are there, only Judah does this. Let's see what Judah says:
"Now therefore, please let your servant remain instead of the boy as a servant to my lord, and let the boy go back with his brothers."
Look at that. Judah, the son of Israel, offers himself in the place of another as a sacrifice, to bear their guilt for having taken the cup. It's beautiful, it's a perfect comparison. We now have a man from the line of Judah, likewise a son of Israel the nation, who also takes the cup - but this time, it is the cup of God's wrath. And he bears the punishment for taking this cup in our stead. I really cannot hammer this home hard enough: look at it. It's perfect down to the cup! Perhaps I find this to be more incredible than it is, that Judah typified the sacrifice Christ would make so perfectly, but it's literally perfect down to a real cup standing in for the metaphorical cup of wrath. The imagery of Christ brought to life in this scene between Joseph and his brothers is incredible. Judah decides to sacrifice himself so that Israel may not die, bearing the weight of the punishment for the cup of wrath.
Of the twelve brothers, who was it that was willing to pay the price for another? Judah. And that is why Christ comes from the line of Judah, son of Israel. See the blessing that Jacob gave Judah on his deathbed (Genesis 49:10–11):
The scepter will not depart from Judah, nor the ruler's staff from between his feet, until he to whom it belongs shall come and the obedience of the nations shall be his. He will tether his donkey to a vine, his colt to the choicest branch; he will wash his garments in wine, his robes in the blood of grapes."

And that eventually came to be Christ. There are many other areas in the Old Testament that point to Christ, but I find the Judah example to be particularly compelling.

Special Article D - Inferior Legal Codes of Israel's Neighbors and Slavery in the Law and New Testament
Let's take a glance at some of the moral codes given to neighbor kingdoms of the Jews. They are the code of Ur-Nammi, the Middle Assyrian Legal Code, and the much more famous Code of Hammurabi (among others).
The Code of Hammurabi is up first. When you examine the penalties therein, you will find many harsh and brutal punishments. Both the Law of Moses and the CoH record the death penalty for adultery and kidnapping, but they diverge in many crucial areas. One will find, observing both, that:
1.	The CoH shows a blatant disregard for the value of human life, and makes no provisions to care for slaves or ensure they are treated well. The code of Ur-Nammi says you should return slaves if you find they've run away, but at least you have to pay the guy who caught them! How nice.
2.	There are no provisions for forgiveness in the CoH, unlike the Mosaic Law.
3.	There are no protections for the poor in the CoH.
The Code of Ur-Nammi suffers similarly to the Code of Hammurabi, yet it somehow manages to be more sexist, with commands like:
If a man proceeded by force, and deflowered the virgin female slave of another man, that man must pay five shekels of silver.
The code of Ur-Nammi includes no protections for widows or those who men divorce (beyond a paltry sum of silver). Contrast this with God's very, very stern warning about their mistreatment in Exodus 22:21-23:
"You shall not ill-treat any widow or orphan. If you do mistreat them, I will heed their cry as soon as they cry out to Me, and My anger shall blaze forth and I will put you to the sword, and your own wives shall become widows and your children orphans." 

I don't think I need to continue. Ur-Nammi details using acid to burn the mouths of slaves who back-talk. It uses the word "shall." Not 'may,' shall. You must burn the mouth of a slave with salt acid. Ur-Nammi says that if you get caught bearing false witness, oops! Pay a fine of some silver. Wonderful protection against lying and false accusations there. The Middle Assyrian Legal Code, though, truly goes above and beyond in its awful treatment of slaves. Note A4:
If a slave or slave-girl has received anything from a married woman, the slave(-girl)'s nose and ears are to be cut off, so that the theft will be avenged and the man shall cut off his wife's ears. But, if the man lets his wife off, and has not cut off her ears, the slave(girl) is not to lose nose or ears and the theft will not be avenged.
So if you steal something and try to hide it by (no doubt) forcing your slave to take it, that slave is to be mutilated. They really love cutting off ears and noses, it's in a lot of their commands. They also love brutalizing women for any number of things. I won't recount the disgusting punishments they list for women alone, for doing anything against men, even if in self-defense (unless it was a defense against rape, those thoughtful Assyrians). Most of the code deals with really oddly intricate sexual circumstances and punishing women and men for them. Usually with mutilation and whipping, sometimes being turned into eunuchs.
Now, in the Mosaic Law, we see the following above-and-beyond treatment of slaves:
•	Killing a slave merited punishment. (Ex. 21:20)
•	Permanently injured slaves had to be set free. (Ex. 21:26–27)
•	Slaves who ran away from oppressive masters were effectively freed (Dt. 23:15–16).
•	Slaves also got the same day of rest as all other Israelites. (Dt. 5:14)
•	Slaves were to be treated as hired workers, not slaves (Lev 25:39–43)
•	All slaves were to be freed after six years (Ex. 21:2)
•	Freed slaves were to be liberally supplied with grain, wine and livestock (Dt. 15:12–15)
•	Every fiftieth year (the year of jubilee), all Hebrew slaves were to be freed, even those owned by foreigners (Lev. 25:10 then 47–54)
I don't see anything in Deuteronomy or Leviticus about whipping a woman till she's half dead for touching a man who didn't want to be touched. Slavery itself requires a larger discussion, though. 1 Peter 2 :18-19 Ephesians 6:5, Deuteronomy 20:10-11, Exodus 21:20-21, Exodus 21:7, Leviticus 25:44-46, numbers 5; these all talk about slavery. What about them, though?
Something to remember is that humans are broken and flawed creatures. We also live in a fallen world with less than ideal circumstances. Therefore, things will happen to us, and we will be in circumstances, that are, in a word, awful. Slavery was a fact in the Ancient Near East, and unfortunately, it still is today; there are tens of millions of slaves around the world.
In general, when you consider something in the Old Testament, consider the moral state of Israel's neighbors. They burned children alive in hopes of getting more crops. The other Ancient Near East legal codes we have show no respect for the sanctity of human life, and violent, disfiguring punishments were the norm. This is what God had to work with - people for whom that was the moral baseline. I would like you to imagine going to the antebellum American South and telling them that they shouldn't kill gay people, they shouldn't own black people, and women should be allowed to vote and make decisions. Or going to Saudi Arabia, and asserting any number of moral improvements. You'll be killed by a mob within the hour, or arrested and beheaded. Israel was incapable of following the standard we have. 
So, when God gave the Israelites a legal code to follow, it had two purposes. One, to introduce the maximal amount of moral improvement they could be expected to tolerate, and to include many layers of protections and regulations for the less than ideal institutions they would have. Two, to separate them from their neighbor cultures, so they were less likely to commingle and thus fall even farther. We know God gave them exactly what they were able to tolerate because they couldn't, most of the time, even follow the one they had! They backslid into the same awful crimes and habits as their neighbors time and time again. Moral improvement of a culture takes time. See Matthew 19:8 for scriptural evidence of this:
Jesus replied, "Moses permitted you to divorce your wives because your hearts were hard. But it was not this way from the beginning."

We also find some reasoning, and evidence, for this in Acts 15:24-29. A letter was written to some new converts, and this is some of what it said:
"We have heard that some went out from us without our authorization and disturbed you, troubling your minds by what they said. So we all agreed to choose some men and send them to you with our dear friends Barnabas and Paul— men who have risked their lives for the name of our Lord Jesus Christ. Therefore we are sending Judas and Silas to confirm by word of mouth what we are writing. It seemed good to the Holy Spirit and to us not to burden you with anything beyond the following requirements: You are to abstain from food sacrificed to idols, from blood, from the meat of strangled animals and from sexual immorality. You will do well to avoid these things."

Further along in Acts 17:29-30:
"Therefore since we are God's offspring, we should not think that the divine being is like gold or silver or stone—an image made by human design and skill. In the past God overlooked such ignorance, but now he commands all people everywhere to repent."

	We see here that it's also merciful in a way to not overburden a group with more than they can bear - if the Israelites had been given everything expected of Christians, they would have failed. They couldn't even manage to keep up the standard they did have. Christians can't keep up the Christian standard! It's easy to say "Oh God should have just laid perfection on them," but Christ himself said "be perfect therefore," and I don't think it will shock anyone to find that Christians are far from perfect! So it is merciful, since violating a command is a sin, to lay less opportunity for sin on those who simply cannot bear it.
That being said, it's worth noting that a slave in ancient times, or classical times, was not the same as what you saw in the Americas a few centuries ago. It was more a matter of economic status, generally. People chose to be slaves as well, so their master would provide for them. Specifically, race-based slavery is inherently condemned by the Bible: all men are created in the image of God, and therefore are equally valuable and worthy of respect. The sort of slavery done in the Americas, where people were stolen from their home lands and sold, would result in you being put to death in the Old Testament, Exodus 21:16:
"Anyone who kidnaps someone is to be put to death, whether the victim has been sold or is still in the kidnapper's possession." 

Further, a man named Simon of Cyrene carried God's cross; Cyrene is in North Africa. Don't tell me God prefers white people when the man who he chose to carry his son's cross was an African (and the Jews were olive skinned…), but back to the topic at hand. Doesn't sound like God would approve of what was going on in Africa back then, does it? Whenever people cherry-pick verses in the Old or New Testaments about slavery, they're extremely careful to avoid including the many, many layers of protections afforded to them.
See here in Deuteronomy 15, for example:
"If any of your people—Hebrew men or women—sell themselves to you and serve you six years, in the seventh year you must let them go free. And when you release them, do not send them away empty-handed. Supply them liberally from your flock, your threshing floor and your winepress. Give to them as the Lord your God has blessed you. Remember that you were slaves in Egypt and the Lord your God redeemed you. That is why I give you this command today."

Let's examine the verses in Leviticus 25:
"Your male and female slaves are to come from the nations around you; from them you may buy slaves. You may also buy some of the temporary residents living among you and members of their clans born in your country, and they will become your property. You can bequeath them to your children as inherited property and can make them slaves for life, but you must not rule over your fellow Israelites ruthlessly."

We've seen the rules on kidnapping; so what do you think this is discussing, given that kidnappers are to be put to death? That's right: foreigners who wish to sell themselves. As just shown in Deuteronomy 15, people back then sold themselves. Different time, different place. (Exodus 21:7-11 will be discussed later on after some more information has been established.)

What about bequeathing them and the like? There are rules for permanent slaves as well such as the year of Jubilee. Let's see the protections given to these foreigners in the next verses, still in Leviticus 25:
"Or if they prosper, they may redeem themselves. They and their buyer are to count the time from the year they sold themselves up to the Year of Jubilee. The price for their release is to be based on the rate paid to a hired worker for that number of years. If many years remain, they must pay for their redemption a larger share of the price paid for them. If only a few years remain until the Year of Jubilee, they are to compute that and pay for their redemption accordingly. They are to be treated as workers hired from year to year; you must see to it that those to whom they owe service do not rule over them ruthlessly.
"'Even if someone is not redeemed in any of these ways, they and their children are to be released in the Year of Jubilee, for the Israelites belong to me as servants. They are my servants, whom I brought out of Egypt. I am the Lord your God."

So every Year of Jubilee, all the slaves were to be released. And remember, they aren't just turned out to the wilds to fend for themselves, they were to be liberally supplied from your flock, winepress, and threshing floor (wheat, barley, etc.). Again, this is an unheard-of improvement of the treatment of servants and slaves over Israel's neighbors, especially considering these protections apply to foreigners! 
On to Deuteronomy 20:10-11:
"When you march up to attack a city, make its people an offer of peace. If they accept and open their gates, all the people in it shall be subject to forced labor and shall work for you."

So, the verses specifically in Deuteronomy 20 are discussing warfare, and nowhere say "you shall take them all as slaves."
It says they may be subject to forced labor. The Law, as we've seen, forbids them from kidnapping them to be slaves or selling them as slaves under penalty of death, so it's hard to argue this is saying they may be taken as slaves. It's discussing a permission for war, and ruling over this foreign city. However, would you like to examine what other Ancient Near East cultures did when a city was won? Horrible calamities befell them, surrender or no. Subjecting them to forced labor, considering that God would remind the Israelites of their treatment under Egypt and demand they do better for these cities, is hardly advocating for chattel slavery. Likewise, this isn't a command for all peoples for all times: it's a permission for ancient Israel when they went to war.
Exodus 21:20:
"Anyone who beats their male or female slave with a rod must be punished if the slave dies as a direct result,"

This verse allows for beating slaves, albeit that you will be charged for murder if they die. Corporal punishment offends our modern sensibilities, yes? So, knowing that, we are left with two interpretations of Exodus 21:
1.	God is thus unreliable: corporal punishment is, according to me, never tolerable. This means God sanctioned evil.
2.	God is thus reliable: even though to me corporal punishment is never tolerable, God made a provision for it, albeit with boundaries; this must mean that corporal punishment is in fact tolerable in certain situations.
You see the difference? One relies on our own understanding of what good and evil are; the other knows that God, as the source of an objective morality, can differentiate better than us what good and evil are, and we must therefore arrive at the conclusion that in some situations, corporal punishment is tolerable. Remember, the laws given to Israel were all in the context of God bringing them up our of Egypt, and they would be reminded of and bearing in mind their treatment there as they read and applied this law. Someone who beat their slaves needlessly or excessively was not acting as God intended. Note that the next verse says this:
"Anyone who beats their male or female slave with a rod must be punished if the slave dies as a direct result, but they are not to be punished if the slave recovers after a day or two, since the slave is their property."

Most bruises take more than two days to recover! This does not allow for broken bones, beatings, or anything of the like. You might be able to get away with caning someone a few times under this if it's applied as written - hardly what atheists want you to imagine when they read this verse to you. No, they want you to picture the chattel slavery of the antebellum South, where slaves were locked in hot boxes, beaten mercilessly, whipped mercilessly. Such crimes would not be tolerated under the Old Testament Law, even less so under the New Covenant of Christ. 
Also, recalling what I said in the first parts of this Special Article, any protection against physical abuse would have been laughed at in every other culture of the time. It's a marked moral improvement that their person was protected at all from abuse. Now it is time for Exodus 21:7-11:
"If a man sells his daughter as a servant, she is not to go free as male servants do. If she does not please the master who has selected her for himself, he must let her be redeemed. He has no right to sell her to foreigners, because he has broken faith with her. If he selects her for his son, he must grant her the rights of a daughter. If he marries another woman, he must not deprive the first one of her food, clothing and marital rights. If he does not provide her with these three things, she is to go free, without any payment of money."

	So what do we see here? At first, we go "look the Bible is horrible it allows men to sell their daughters!" And I know what you're picturing. You're picturing the girl being forcibly sold in chains to rest of her life. First, given what we've seen above, no, she can't be raped. She can't be beaten in any real sense of the word. Let's see the protections established in this verse: if she doesn't do a good job, she has to be 'redeemed.' He can't get rid of her, especially not to foreigners. If he decides she is to marry his son (remember, during this time period girls didn't have much choice… hard hearts and all), he has to make her his daughter. She's not just a sex doll for him. Second, if he marries someone else (the verse does not necessarily imply that he has married the servant girl), she is given powerful protections, or the right to go free.
	On to slavery in the New Testament. First, see here in 1 Timothy 10–11:
"for the sexually immoral, for those practicing homosexuality, for slave traders and liars and perjurers—and for whatever else is contrary to the sound doctrine that conforms to the gospel concerning the glory of the blessed God, which he entrusted to me."

We see here a similar idea to one echoed in Exodus 21:16 (quoted above). Consider that as you read other verses that supposedly support slavery in the Bible. See here in Titus 2:9–12:
"Teach slaves to be subject to their masters in everything, to try to please them, not to talk back to them, and not to steal from them, but to show that they can be fully trusted, so that in every way they will make the teaching about God our Savior attractive. For the grace of God has appeared that offers salvation to all people. It teaches us to say "No" to ungodliness and worldly passions, and to live self-controlled, upright and godly lives in this present age,"

The New Testament says that it is trying to make Christianity attractive to the masters; why do you think that is? A theme in the New Testament is "the gospel comes first." If someone accepts the gospel, they are now suddenly a container for a wonderful good, and desire to be like Christ. Whatever sin you see someone committing will only be resolved by accepting the gospel. A slave master who (truly) accepts Christ will not be a slave master for long, and their treatment of their charges will dramatically improve in the meantime.
You see, the gospel is the only important thing. Paul tells us in Ephesians and in Titus and elsewhere that our worldly station is irrelevant if we have the gospel. We are to do good and spread it no matter our circumstances. Now, of course, we are to strive for a higher standard of moral uprightness, hence the call for slaves to be as good as they can be, because of the gospel, so that they can spread it to their masters. We also see this not-so-subtle warning in Colossians 4:1:
"Masters, provide your slaves with what is right and fair, because you know that you also have a Master in heaven."

Paul isn't saying "hey slavery is great! Become a master! Own some slaves!" He's issuing warnings and giving conduct standards to those who are. Paul is telling slaves in the verses he discusses slavery in (be it Ephesians or elsewhere) that since resisting is likely to only make their situation profoundly worse (think of what happened to most runaway slaves, and look up the aftermath of slave rebellions), they need to win over their masters with kindness and obedience, so that the masters want to hear the gospel, and all else will fall into place. This is the Bible's approach to reforming society, through love and grace. That's how you really end a cultural institution - change people's hearts so they no longer want to do it. 

Numbers 5 is a protection for women whose husbands suspect them of being unfaithful. "What? What makes you say that?" In Numbers 5, we see a description of the procedure for when there is no "witness and she wasn't caught in the act," but the husband still thinks her unfaithful. Consider your typical brutal, Ancient Near East culture. What precisely do you think will happen to the woman in all of them except Israel? She will be punished as if she had done it, because he believes she did. This happens today in first world countries, even (and others of course). And, a punishment is recognition that the thing itself is not good.

Special Article E - Literally pierced, figuratively crushed
(This Special Article is referenced in the main text. It refers to the prophecy in Isaiah about the Suffering Servant, or the Messiah. Jesus is said to have been both crushed and pierced, and I only interpret the pierced literally when defending the prophecy as referring to Jesus Christ. What follows is why.) Once, when I asked "why are we taking pierced literally but not crushed?" I was told, "well, Jesus was stabbed so we know that one is literal," and they didn't understand how circular that was when referring to prophetic accuracy. But thankfully, I do not have to rely upon bald circular logic here. If you look at the Hebrew for both pierce and crush, and then examine other Scriptural uses of those words, a distinction in use becomes apparent. See here, Job 19:2:
"How long will you torment me and break me in pieces with words?"

I have chosen this one specifically to answer what being "crushed" means metaphorically as well. The "break me in pieces" there is the same Hebrew word used in Isaiah 53:5. Metaphorically, it's something like trample, smash, oppress, but with an overwhelming force. We see it used that way all over the Old Testament. For an example of Isaiah himself specifically using it this way, see Isaiah 19:10:
"Those who are the pillars of the land will be crushed, and all who work for pay will be grieved."

It's not intended that the esteemed of Egypt be literally crushed under rocks or something; but that they and their households will be smashed, brought to nothing. Now, pierced. The word I suppose most accurately means "to bore [into something, wounding implied]", which is why you see "pierced" rendered as "wounded" sometimes, they change the focus (incorrectly in my view) from the boring to the implied wounding. Pierced is by far the more literal rendering.
But what does that have to do with this? We're hitting the max of my understanding of Hebrew, here, but see this verse, Ezekiel 32:26:
"Meshech-Tubal is there, and all her multitude, her graves all around it, all of them uncircumcised, slain by the sword; for they spread their terror in the land of the living."

Let me explain. There are three version of חלל. The rendering in Isaiah 53:5 begins with מ (mem), which basically means "from" or "because of". So we should look for חלל instead, because that's the root word. We find it here in Ezekiel 32:
 
Where the root word is used literally for people run through with a blade. Given that the overwhelming majority of uses for "crush" are metaphorical, and multiple uses of the root word for "pierced" (since the exact word is used nowhere else) are intended in a literal, stabbed context (see also Ezekiel 32:28), I feel confident saying it is reasonable to interpret pierced as literal and crushed as metaphorical.
The point is, you could make an argument that pierced shouldn't be literal; but no one really does that that I've ever seen. If anything, the arguments I've seen against it are that it's saying the Suffering Servant was killed by the piercing instead of that he simply was pierced. But you can also make a strong argument that interpreting it literally is reasonable.
Lastly, I've never heard of any Jewish person debating the metaphorical interpretation of "crushed," but if someone were to do so I'd point them to the uses of it in Scripture as metaphor. So that's the point, at the end of it; we see "crushed" used metaphorically, and we see "pierced" used literally, so there is a basis for interpreting them in the way I have in the context of the Isaiah prophecy.


Special Article F - Descendant of cursed king Jehoiachin
I was once asked, "how can Jesus be King of Israel (John 1:49) if He is a descendant of King Jeconiah (Matthew 1: 11-12); who was cursed by God and Jeremiah said that none of his children would sit on David's throne (Jeremiah 22:30)?"
Always best to go to the verses. In Jeremiah 22 we find this:
"Record this man as if childless, a man who will not prosper in his lifetime, for none of his offspring will prosper, none will sit on the throne of David or rule anymore in Judah"

The first cheeky thought doesn't work; you initially want to say "well Jesus wasn't his offspring," but Jesus was called Abraham's offspring and that's way farther back, so that feels duplicitous. No, the simplest way I see is that the phrase "in his lifetime" applies to the whole verse. My evidence? Haggai 2:23:

"'On that day,' declares the Lord Almighty, 'I will take you, my servant Zerubbabel son of Shealtiel,' declares the Lord, 'and I will make you like my signet ring, for I have chosen you,' declares the Lord Almighty."

Zerubbabel was our fellow's grandson, and God showed him mercy in this way. Look a few verses earlier in Jeremiah 22, concerning Jehoiachin:
"As surely as I live," declares the Lord, "even if you, Jehoiachin son of Jehoiakim king of Judah, were a signet ring on my right hand, I would still pull you off."

The signet ring imagery is not a coincidence; God does not deal in coincidences. Thus, the "in his lifetime" interpretation would be my bet, and there is no contradiction here. 

Special Article G - The Unforgivable Sin
The unforgivable sin was something, keyword "was," probably unique to that moment in time. Mark 3:22-30:
"And the teachers of the law who came down from Jerusalem said, "He is possessed by Beelzebul! By the prince of demons he is driving out demons."
So Jesus called them over to him and began to speak to them in parables: "How can Satan drive out Satan? If a kingdom is divided against itself, that kingdom cannot stand. If a house is divided against itself, that house cannot stand. And if Satan opposes himself and is divided, he cannot stand; his end has come. In fact, no one can enter a strong man's house without first tying him up. Then he can plunder the strong man's house.  Truly I tell you, people can be forgiven all their sins and every slander they utter, but whoever blasphemes against the Holy Spirit will never be forgiven; they are guilty of an eternal sin."
He said this because they were saying, "He has an impure spirit.""

Notice Jesus is responding directly to the charge that he is Satan; these men had no excuse. They knew precisely who he was, and they accused him of that. Clearly, Jesus considered that an unforgivable crime, and in verse 30, makes it clear that their charge is what he was referring to. Think about it: they accused the Holy Spirit of being Satan. The most good being, as if he were the worst being, with full knowledge and the worst intention. It's a unique crime. 
A word of advice, though; I'm not entirely sure about that being exclusive to the Pharisees, so if I were you, I wouldn't go around telling people the Holy Spirit was evil. No, if the thought enters your head you aren't going to Hell. But if you intentionally and willfully level the accusation at the Holy Spirit, that he is evil when you should or do know that he is not and likewise know and understand who he truly is… best of luck to you friend. I don't know if it's still considered unforgivable or not. Jesus didn't put a time limit on any of his proclamations. It's an extremely serious charge, so much so that it caused Jesus Christ to withdraw his offer of salvation; the only time he ever did so by my counting. But don't be afraid. It's an easy thing not to do, since by virtue of not wanting to do it, you are essentially incapable of doing it. Isaiah 12:2:
"Surely God is my salvation; I will trust and not be afraid. The LORD, the LORD himself, is my strength and my defense; he has become my salvation."

Special Article H - Practical Definition for Absolute Morality
You see, when there's a supreme God, over which there is no entity nor could, by definition of God, anything or any number of things ever surpass this entity, that God becomes the basis for an objective morality. Why? Well, what is morality? A definition would be: "Principles concerning the distinction between good and bad actions and ideas." And who gets to define good and bad? Generally, everybody can do this: these are all subjective moralities, though.
Now, the reason why only a supreme, creative God can set an objective (as opposed to subjective) morality is a bit subtle: in every instance, every possible instance even, Odin, who has supreme power mind you, will act and carry out consequences in the universe in line with his morality. Note these two reasons that make the supreme God's an objective one:
1.	It applies everywhere and at all times both past and present; this means it is not dependent upon a subject
2.	It cannot be challenged, overruled, or modified
Mind that due to God's nature as unchanging, these facts are immutable. That is 'objectivity,' no? The definition of objectivity can be quibbled over, but in order for a word to be meaningful, it must have some differentiation from other words. What separates objectivity from subjectivity is whether something is an interpretation (i.e. requiring a subject), or a flat fact. And as just described, a supreme God can make his morality a flat fact, as he is unchanging, and nothing could prevail upon his will to make it anything but a flat fact, despite him being a subject - his morality, while requiring his person, prevails upon reality like a flat fact does. That implies objectivity. "But what has that got to do with God necessarily being good?" I'm getting there, don't think I have gotten lost on a tangent, but we are not quite done defending why God is necessarily good (despite not knowing what good is yet), and this is rather important.
Stalin, for instance, could not force his subjectivity into objectivity, for a number of reasons. One, his view could be, and indeed was, challenged, by at the least the United States. Second, he only controlled one place; there were places where his views were not applied. Third, even in places where his rule was enforced, it did depend upon those enforcers in the first place, and further it could be resisted. 
That is the difference between a subjective and an objective morality. God defines what is good, and because that definition becomes objective, his morality is necessarily good. Note, I am sometimes told this is circular: they say "Dane, you've invented a circle: it's good because I say it's good, so we must accept it as good since we take it that God is good." But this is not quite what I am saying. I am saying that God has such a sheer force of will, such an omni-presence, that what he says is good, is for all intents and purposes, an objective good; it applies at all times, in all places. In a linguistically and practically worthless way, it is subjective, the subject being God, but by any practical or useful measure, it is objective. 
All creatures, all of reality, all are held to this one unchanging standard; further, there is no way to escape this standard. Whatever standards may pop up inside of reality, they are all still secondary to it. Therefore, what this supreme God has defined as good, is good, for all practical intents and purposes. Speaking more to the circular argument, there is no fundamental definition of good that does not depend upon a subject; but that's because morality itself depends upon the presence of subjects. The whole thing is subject-to-subject interactions; our choices are to either become nihilists or be able to have useful discourse about the issue. Does that make sense? Theoretically, you cannot have an objective good. Practically, which is what matters, you can. 

Special Article I - Camus and Existentialism, a Christian Response
I have been asked, "What should be the theist/Catholic response to existentialists like Camus who thought humans should embrace the meaninglessness of life and live 'authentically'?"
I'm going to focus on Camus, because I haven't read much Sartre nor do I care to. But Camus has a lot, actually, to say that is very useful for Christians. Camus himself was what one could call an absurdist, and that's what I'll be discussing: Camus' absurdism and the insights Camus had about our world in relation to God's truth. Let's make sure we're on the same page about absurdism: I'm arguing against a school of thought that says "The universe is not inherently rational and has no purpose."
Camus is a quixotic figure, but instead of windmills he's tilting at the very concepts of reason and purpose themselves. Camus himself said that man can't escape asking "what's the reason I'm here?" Of course, as I just stated, he finds that there is no answer to this question. He thinks we should just survive with an "irresolvable emptiness." His philosophy hinges on this: "it is absurd that we so desire to ask these questions and seek their answers, yet there are and can be no answers."
My answer to this? You are correct, Camus. It is absurd, because there are answers to those questions. This is why I like Camus: he understood that there was something fundamental within us that drives us to ask those questions. That is a powerful thing for a theist to be able to rely upon when discussing such things with non-believers, is atheist philosophers who admit the very same. Camus admitted it made no sense, and we agree! It doesn't make sense, if you take as your conclusion that the universe is aimless and senseless.
Camus' ideas are also dangerous, though, to individuals and communities who embrace the face of them but don't actually read him all the way. (Much like Christianity itself.) Someone who sees those conclusions would not be remiss in asking "Why should I not just kill myself?" Or, perhaps worse, "Why should I not dominate others for my purposes?" So you must be careful about him. (I must say, fools who don't understand Christianity and its focus on sacrificial love and servitude also come up with backwards, evil answers to these questions.)
But back to it. He says of Sisyphus that he shows we can live with "the certainty of a crushing fate, without the resignation that ought to accompany it". Again, to that I would say, you recognize the crushing fate, but you choose to ignore it? You choose to just say, "nothing to be done about this!" and go on? Nonsense. That is the absurd statement. There is a way to escape your "crushing fate." Jesus Christ.
He further says: "All Sisyphus's silent joy is contained therein. His fate belongs to him. His rock is his thing". Camus, again, makes a profound insight here but ends it with wrong conclusions: yes, man needs something to give him purpose, something external. Camus calls Sisyphus the "master of his days", but this is obviously wrong: Sisyphus is bound to move that rock up and down that hill for eternity. He is no master. Mere consciousness of something does not make you its owner. Perhaps it does in terms of you being able to control what meaning is ascribed to it, but that only works when there is no overriding, commanding, objective meaning applied - however Christians know that there is such a thing, since God is very much real.
Camus wants you to establish your own meaning, your own profundity, for the absurdity of existence. But the theist rejects this: God has told us the meaning of life, he has told us the purpose of the universe and ourselves. There is no "ultimate ignorance" - sure, God has not told us everything, but he has told us what we need to know (2 Timothy 3:16–17).
Now, there is more to say on Camus' philosophy, such as a thread of "living for the present moment." One could say that Camus advocates for living without hope and without despair. Camus says something again with no small sense of profundity here, in Summer in Algiers:
"During their entire youth men find here a life in proportion to their beauty. Then, later on, the downhill slope and obscurity. They wagered on the flesh, but knowing they were to lose. In Algiers whoever is young and alive finds sanctuary and occasion for triumphs everywhere: in the bay, the sun, the red and white games on the seaward terraces, the flowers and sports stadiums. But for whoever has lost his youth there is nothing to cling to and nowhere where melancholy can escape itself. Elsewhere, Italian terraces, European cloisters, or the profile of the Provencal hills—all places where man can flee his humanity and gently liberate himself from himself. But everything here calls for solitude and the blood of young men."
And he continues a sentence later:
"At Belcourt and Bab-el-Oued old men seated in the depths of cafes listen to the bragging of young men with plastered hair. Summer betrays these beginnings and ends to us in Algiers. During those months the city is deserted. But the poor remain, and the sky. We join the former as they go down toward the harbor and man's treasures … In the evening, sated with such wealth, they return to the oilcloth and kerosene lamp that constitute the whole setting of their life."
I'm not quite sure how to parse into words what is being revealed here, but perhaps you get the picture of it by reading it yourself. What would the Christian's response be to this? Multiple things. First, the flesh is weak and fleeting. It is passing away, along with the whole rest of the world and its treasures (Matthew 6:19). We should instead build up treasure in heaven, not here on earth as Camus' young men do. Second, see here in Ecclesiastes 1:2, which is essentially a whole book of ripostes to Camus:

"'Meaningless! Meaningless!' says the Teacher. 'Utterly meaningless! Everything is meaningless'"

Some translations render "meaningless" as "vanity" or "futility". There have been a number of good studies on exactly what Solomon means, but meaningless/futile/vain seem to capture the nuance well enough for me. See again in Ecclesiastes 1:14:
"I have seen all the things that are done under the sun; all of them are meaningless, a chasing after the wind."

From a Godless perspective, from Camus' perspective, everything is meaningless. Camus agrees with Solomon. This bears restating: Camus is generally correct in every regard about what life is apart from God. It is only with the presence of God that we find meaning, purpose, and hope. Nothing will satisfy you apart from God, is the meaning of Ecclesiastes. See verse 12:13:
"Now all has been heard; here is the conclusion of the matter: Fear God and keep his commandments, for this is the duty of all mankind"

If someone presses you on Camus, the book of Ecclesiastes is your answer. There are (at least) ten vanities, and Camus would no doubt agree with them:

1. Human wisdom is meaningless (2:14–16)
2. Labor (2:18–23)
3.Amassing things (2:26)
4. Life itself (3:18–22)
5. Competition (4:4)
6. Selfish overwork (4:7–8)
7. Power and authority (4:16)
8. Greed (5:10)
9. Wealth and accolades (6:1–2)
10. Perfunctory religion (8:10–14)
Without building your foundation upon Christ, indeed these things are nothing; when you die, they're gone. When we all die, they're gone. That is why I like Camus, he points you to the Gospel from the other way round, the inevitable conclusion of man should there be no God. He identifies the core contradiction of our yearning for purpose in a (to him) purposeless existence. The atheist will of course say "it is only a failure of us, it does not highlight a contradiction in reality." But we see it for what it is: God has made us in his image, which means we want community like he does (he is triune, after all, community is part of his essence); this means we yearn to be connected to him, we yearn for his truths. We yearn for the eternal, which is the only way anything can truly matter: if it persists forever. Camus saw it, and we see it. He simply didn't find Christ's truth. Fortunately for us, we need not be lost in despair. 1 Thessalonians 4:13–14:
"But we do not want you to be uninformed, brothers, about those who are asleep, that you may not grieve as others do who have no hope. For since we believe that Jesus died and rose again, even so, through Jesus, God will bring with him those who have fallen asleep."

1 Corinthians 15:13–22 effectively summarizes the issue at hand:
"But if there is no resurrection of the dead, then not even Christ has been raised. And if Christ has not been raised, then our preaching is in vain and your faith is in vain. … And if Christ has not been raised, your faith is futile and you are still in your sins. Then those also who have fallen asleep in Christ have perished. If in Christ we have hope in this life only, we are of all people most to be pitied. But in fact Christ has been raised from the dead, the firstfruits of those who have fallen asleep. For as by a man came death, by a man has come also the resurrection of the dead. For as in Adam all die, so also in Christ shall all be made alive."

I think these verses say it better than I ever could (gee I wonder why, perhaps because God wrote them). This is the whole of our response. It occurs to me I didn't quite answer the question fully; there was a bit there about authenticity. The answer is rather simple: Camus' "Authenticity Principle" states that action should, in general, harmonize with one's knowledge. That is, one's knowledge should serve as that which determines action. Christians agree with this! If we have the knowledge of the truth, we are to follow God's commands (basically the whole book of 1 John). And see this from James 2:
"What good is it, my brothers, if someone says he has faith but does not have works? Can that faith save him? If a brother or sister is poorly clothed and lacking in daily food, and one of you says to them, "Go in peace, be warmed and filled," without giving them the things needed for the body, what good is that? So also faith by itself, if it does not have works, is dead."

We find all throughout the New Testament that if you have the knowledge of Christ, you are an heir of Christ, and should be working for the success of the household. This is in exact agreement with Camus. The knowledge of Christ determines how we should act.

Special Article J - Josephus Didn't Mention Herod Killing Children?
I've heard it argued that Josephus didn't mention Herod's killing of all the children when Jesus was born. When I've been in the room when Christians were told this, I saw the reaction on their faces: "Really? Josephus didn't mention such a dramatic event? That's not good." I in fact only include this in my work because of the shock I saw on their faces when told this - the common Christian may have heard of Josephus, and knows his importance to history in this period: to hear that he did not mention this event, thus, is shocking. But when you look beyond the face of it, there's no actual problem.
The first question we should ask is, "Would Herod have done this?" The answer is a blinding "yes, yes he would have." Herod, was known, by Josephus in point of fact, to have murdered anyone who could possibly threaten his throne. The Antiquities (Josephus's work) record a number of murders of people even vaguely capable of taking the throne, along with many details about his spy networks. He had several of his sons murdered as well (again, Antiquities). In the later years of his life, he executed 300 of his military commanders. Josephus even records a prophesy against Herod saying that his throne would be taken from him (Antiquities 17:42-45; LCL 8:393).
As for someone recording it who is hostile to the faith, Macrobius, ca. AD 400, a pagan writer, in his book Saturnalia (2.4.11), wrote: "When it was heard that, as part of the slaughter of boys up to two years old, Herod, king of the Jews, had ordered his own son to be killed, he [Emperor Augustus] remarked, 'It is better to be Herod's pig than his son.'" 
So why then didn't Josephus write it down? It's imminently possible Josephus, writing at the end of the first century AD, was unaware of a minor event that took place a century earlier. Josephus also got a good amount of his information from Herod the Great's personal historian. I can't really imagine a more suspicious source than the personal historian of a crazed, murderous man like Herod.
Also the tragedy was likely nowhere near as large as people seem to think it would have been. Bethlehem probably had a population of 300 people, meaning there weren't even that many babies to be killed, so this is hardly a reportable tragedy to begin with. There was also rather a lot going on at the same time as this small episode, what with various festivals and other events. Josephus was furthermore writing for the Romans and Greeks, neither of whom would care about infant deaths in a far-off province. And of course, just because Josephus didn't record it does not mean it didn't happen.

Special Article K - Is Hell Eternal or Temporary?
To start off with some background, there are broadly three camps with regards to Hell. The first is what I'll call "Eternalists." They presume Hell is eternal punishment. Then we have "Annihilationists," who believe Hell is a place where you go for a little while before being consumed. Finally, we have "Denialists," who believe Hell doesn't exist at all and it's a metaphor for… something. Or they believe the common conception of Hell vastly overstates its horrors. Perhaps there is a theoretical fourth group, that I'll call "Redempetivists," who believe Hell exists to remediate our sins so we can be with God, but I've never met one, so they're not much worth discussing. I won't waste much time on background here, but this Special Article will largely focus on why the Eternalist interpretation is the only biblically supported one.
Diving right in, Annihilationists and Denialists often first bring up 2nd Peter 2:6 to defend their position: "if he condemned the cities of Sodom and Gomorrah by burning them to ashes, and made them an example of what is going to happen to the ungodly;"

Didn't Peter just plainly state that all the people were burned up, and they will be burned up in Hell? Well, for starters, we can't look at this verse in isolation: any anti-Hell people will always have to contend with Matthew 25:46 (the twin eternals, as I discuss in the work's main body). If you view it in connection with that, and other verses, it becomes apparent that what Peter is focusing on here is the burning itself, not the burning up. But more on that later. 
Malachi 4 is often brought up next, I'll reproduce the chapter here:
"Surely the day is coming; it will burn like a furnace. All the arrogant and every evildoer will be stubble, and the day that is coming will set them on fire," says the Lord Almighty. "Not a root or a branch will be left to them. But for you who revere my name, the sun of righteousness will rise with healing in its rays. And you will go out and frolic like well-fed calves. Then you will trample on the wicked; they will be ashes under the soles of your feet on the day when I act," says the Lord Almighty. "Remember the law of my servant Moses, the decrees and laws I gave him at Horeb for all Israel. "See, I will send the prophet Elijah to you before that great and dreadful day of the Lord comes. He will turn the hearts of the parents to their children, and the hearts of the children to their parents; or else I will come and strike the land with total destruction."

If you are against eternal torment, you may read this and go "aha! See? They are turned to ashes. Just like in 2nd Peter! Odd, Dane, that these references to it involve the evil being turned to ashes."
For starters, analogies have ends. When, say, believers are compared to sheep, does the analogy not stop as us being completely senseless? Does it not stop at us not having four feet? This analogy is also repeated multiple times in the Bible, so mere repetition of an analogy with a specific component does not automatically make that component more real. You must remember that. Second, and more importantly, the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah was of the physical presence of those people and those places. Those people were quite literally turned to ash by the flame. As Lamentations 4:6 says:
"The punishment of my people is greater than that of Sodom, which was overthrown in a moment without a hand turned to help her."

Sodom and Gomorrah were consumed by the flame, which went away. Whereas in verses like Mark 9:43, we see this:
"If your hand causes you to stumble, cut it off. It is better for you to enter life maimed than with two hands to go into Hell, where the fire never goes out."

What is the purpose of a flame that does not go out… if it consumes the sinners in an instant, and then is empty? See further on in Mark 9:
"And if your eye causes you to stumble, pluck it out. It is better for you to enter the kingdom of God with one eye than to have two eyes and be thrown into Hell, where 'the worms that eat them do not die, and the fire is not quenched.' Everyone will be salted with fire."

So, the worms don't die, and the fire won't be quenched, and note that it says everyone will be salted with fire. What is the purpose, or what was the purpose I should say, of salt at that time? As a preservative. You will be doused and preserved by the flames in Hell. The flame is called eternal multiple times – also, see this example in 2 Thessalonians 1:9:
"They will be punished with everlasting destruction and shut out from the presence of the Lord and from the glory of his might"

That word, everlasting, is also used to refer to eternal life in Matthew 19:16, Mark 10:30… and is of course used to refer to the flames of Hell many times (Matthew 25:41, 18:8, etc.). The word "destruction" may be more aptly rendered as "ruin" – note I am not trying to worm out of the use of destruction, but explain its inclusion next to the word "eternal." See this use of it in 1 Timothy 6:9:
"Those who want to get rich fall into temptation and a trap and into many foolish and harmful desires that plunge people into ruin and destruction."

Now, which word, 'ruin' or 'destruction' – do you think is the same Greek word as the one in Thessalonians? By my asking, you may guess that it is actually ruin. Hence, the word destruction given in Thessalonians is more correctly rendered as ruin, given the context of eternal being paired with it. 
So, on the one hand, we have metaphorical references to the fire, and then we have the verses that literally describe the fire. The more specific, literal depictions are of eternal flame. This lends significance credence to the idea that the analogies are being taken too far by the Annihilationists and Denialists. They turn to the analogies instead of the literal depictions; if they were right, there would be a contradiction in Scripture. So, we can only conclude that the death is eternal. But I want to return to Malachi 4 briefly, specifically this: 
"See, I will send the prophet Elijah to you before that great and dreadful day of the Lord comes."

A certain annihilationist site, that I won't reference here as I won't be directing readers to them, says this of that reference in Malachi: "first, and most importantly, the argument that Malachi 4 was entirely fulfilled in Jesus's coming should give us pause because it basically makes no sense. The reference to Elijah is a difficulty that must be overcome by those who say that this passage describes the end of the world. … How exactly did Jesus's first coming eliminate the wicked completely, as the imagery suggests? How are they left with neither root nor branch? What event on earth, either that has happened or could happen, would be anything like the imagery suggests? Now, one could say that Jesus began the process by his first coming. I would agree. But the events of Malachi 4:1-3 still have not happened."
What a misconception of the nature of Christ's death and resurrection this is! Did Christ's coming not signify the end? Tetelestai, that powerful word of Christ: "it is finished." How are they left with neither root nor branch? Remember Christ's own parable of the tree? See here in Romans 15:12, Paul referencing Isaiah:
And again Isaiah says, "The root of Jesse will come, even he who arises to rule the Gentiles; in him will the Gentiles hope."

Who is the root? Christ! The wicked thus do not have the root. And what about the branch? See here in Romans 11:11-31:
But if some of the branches were broken off, and you, although a wild olive shoot, were grafted in among the others and now share in the nourishing root of the olive tree, do not be arrogant toward the branches. If you are, remember it is not you who support the root, but the root that supports you. Then you will say, "Branches were broken off so that I might be grafted in." That is true. They were broken off because of their unbelief, but you stand fast through faith. So do not become proud, but fear.

So, we see here that the unbelieving branches will be and have been through Christ cut off from the root. So when someone tells you that Malachi suggests the wicked have been completely defeated and that hasn't happened… well, they have. By Christ. If they say that Malachi 4 has not happened with reference to the victory of Christ as Elijah coming, they are woefully incorrect. 
In short, when taken in conjunction with Matthew 25:46, in which the same word for eternal is paired with life and punishment, we find that the analogies given in the common verses that support Hell as being temporary are a case of analogies being taken past their means. The verses that discuss Hell in a literal sense all call it eternal.

Special Article L - Inherited Sin-Liability and Sin vs. Iniquity
"What about us being liable for other sins? I've heard something about us being punished for the sins of our father to the third generation." I always argue that the 'third generation' comment is more a reflection of the causal effects of sin, i.e. if your grandfather was a drunkard, I imagine your life station has been in some way reduced by his failures (this is what Scripture calls iniquity, the corruption, as opposed to culpability, that infects those who sin). Another apt example is that if your grandmother, while late in pregnancy with your mother, did drugs or the like… the eggs, i.e., half of your genetic material, inside your mother would be affected by that. But, aside from that, what does Scripture actually say about our responsibility for the sins of our fathers?
We turn to Ezekiel 18, where God, through Ezekiel, brings up a proverb where the parents eat sour grapes, and their children's mouths pucker. (Note this instance of sour grapes is distinct from Aesop's fable about the fox and grapes that he cannot reach being sour.) God literally says this:
"As surely as I live, declares the Sovereign Lord, you will no longer quote this proverb in Israel. For everyone belongs to me, the parent as well as the child—both alike belong to me. The one who sins is the one who will die."

Clearly, he does not like the association between him and this idea of inherited guilt. God then uses an example of a violent man, and God declares the violent son will face judgement. This violent man, though, has a righteous son of his own, and this is God's explanation:
"Will such a man live? He will not! Because he has done all these detestable things, he is to be put to death; his blood will be on his own head. But suppose this son has a son who sees all the sins his father commits, and though he sees them, he does not do such things. He will not die for his father's sin; he will surely live. But his father will die for his own sin, because he practiced extortion, robbed his brother and did what was wrong among his people.
Yet you ask, 'Why does the son not share the guilt of his father?' Since the son has done what is just and right and has been careful to keep all my decrees, he will surely live. The one who sins is the one who will die. The child will not share the guilt of the parent, nor will the parent share the guilt of the child. The righteousness of the righteous will be credited to them, and the wickedness of the wicked will be charged against them."

God then continues here:
"But if a wicked person turns away from all the sins they have committed and keeps all my decrees and does what is just and right, that person will surely live; they will not die. None of the offenses they have committed will be remembered against them. Because of the righteous things they have done, they will live. Do I take any pleasure in the death of the wicked? declares the Sovereign Lord. Rather, am I not pleased when they turn from their ways and live?
But if a righteous person turns from their righteousness and commits sin and does the same detestable things the wicked person does, will they live? None of the righteous things that person has done will be remembered. Because of the unfaithfulness they are guilty of and because of the sins they have committed, they will die."

Seems reasonable to me. If you, at the end, refuse God, you will be held liable. If you, at the end, recognize your faults and appeal to grace, you will be forgiven. It matters what state you are in when you go to God; see the parable of the Workers in the Vineyard in Matthew 20:1-16 for this logic's mirror under the new covenant. 
But in short, you are not going to be inheriting liability for sins. But! What about Nehemiah chapter 9? First, Psalm 32:5 uses three different words:
"I acknowledged my sin to you, and I did not cover my iniquity; I said, 'I will confess my transgressions to the Lord,' and you forgave the iniquity of my sin."

Iniquity is, essentially, the twistedness that results from sin. (Transgressions are serious crossing the line type behaviors.) Iniquity is corruption, not culpability. Nehemiah chapter 9 is a case study in iniquity and sin. Verses 16-35 concern the iniquity of the current generation in relation to their ancestors, and show us that corruption, while not culpability, does persist across persons and generations. Again, one more verse to close the book on the idea you can be held responsible for your parents' sins, Deuteronomy 24:16:
"Fathers shall not be put to death because of their children, nor shall children be put to death because of their fathers. Each one shall be put to death for his own sin."

You should turn to Special Article O to see more on this topic.

Special Article M - The "Genocides" of 1 Samuel 15 and Deuteronomy 20
	So, what about 1 Samuel 15, and Deuteronomy 20? People very often find these to be troubling passages. As for some background, the Amalekites had been attacking Israel for literal generations. We see them mentioned all the way back in Exodus, even, and Moses was involved with them. Deuteronomy 25:17:
"Remember what the Amalekites did to you along the way when you came out of Egypt. When you were weary and worn out, they met you on your journey and cut off all who were lagging behind…"

Frankly, I'm sick of "justifying" these stories to people. I'm proud of them, and here's why (I am referring to 1 Samuel 15 and Deuteronomy 20). The Amalekites were persistent in their efforts to destroy Israel. They were an evil, awful people. What we find in the story of the Amalekites is a very real, very human story about what kinds of things happen between people groups. If stories like this were not in Scripture, people would accuse it of being fantastical fairy tales for kids; with stories like it in, they accuse it of being brutal. There is no winning with some.
This particular story gave hope to a people group who was and is constantly oppressed. "See how the Lord saves us from those who would destroy us without cause," Rabbis have said. This story tells us that God's love for Israel is fierce, and real. If someone keeps coming into your house and harming your children, day after day, will you say "just coexist with them," and do nothing? Only if you care nothing for your children. If you have ever been seriously wronged by another out of malice, you know the safety of a God who is not afraid to pick up a sword and solve the problem.
I find that people who judge the story in 1 Samuel 15 never bother to learn the history. They never bother to look at it through any eyes but their own; disinterested and oh so safe, many millennia and miles away. They don't even look around these two verses.
Here's the thing, this story isn't for you, if you're sitting cozy in the first world with this book out in the open. This story is for the Christians of the Middle East today, who are being slaughtered and legislated out of existence. It's for the Christians in Nero's coliseum having their organs ripped out with hooks. "Look here," God says, "I'm coming with fire and fury, and I am angry."
I must second point to how calling this a "genocide" is a sign that you haven't read these books very closely, because if you look at other such " genocides" in Scripture you quickly see that this is staple ancient grandstanding. Look here, in 1 Samuel 30, which takes place after the command to kill all the Amalekites:
"David and his men reached Ziklag on the third day. Now the Amalekites had raided the Negev and Ziklag. They had attacked Ziklag and burned it, and had taken captive the women and everyone else in it, both young and old. They killed none of them, but carried them off as they went on their way."

Who do we see here? The Amalekites. It was extremely common for ancient rulers to use this hyperbolic language of "oh I killed them all, I salted their fields, their babies I used as footstools." Everyone knew what was up. Not one ancient person saw the command in 1 Samuel 15 to kill them all and Saul reporting it done, and then the same people showing back up in 1 Samuel 30, as a contradiction.

Upon reading this, I received a reply: "Let's not forget that your god also specifically instructed genocide against the Canaanites because they 'sinned' - so his little lackey Joshua went about his work quite thoroughly according to that book of horror you call the OT. Do you think there were no children among the Canaanites?"
Ah yes, the Canaanites, another group who were "totally destroyed." Here are the verses:
"Completely destroy them—the Hittites, Amorites, Canaanites, Perizzites, Hivites and Jebusites—as the Lord your God has commanded you. Otherwise, they will teach you to follow all the detestable things they do in worshiping their gods, and you will sin against the Lord your God."

Look here in a later chapter:
"Now when all the Amorite kings west of the Jordan and all the Canaanite kings along the coast heard how the Lord had dried up the Jordan before the Israelites until they had crossed over, their hearts melted in fear and they no longer had the courage to face the Israelites."

Oops. Like I said, classic ancient hyperbole. But that's not what is important. When I look at 1 Samuel 15, I go "look here! This is a real God with real love who defends his people and tackles problems head on! I pray he'll order my defense so vigorously from wicked men!"

Just like he did with Jesus. He ordered his Son to die to save me from wickedness, my own wickedness in fact. God does not change. He does not contradict his love for his children on even one page of Scripture; he always defends his flock from wickedness, be it from within or without. In the West our enemies may not so flagrantly attack the Church with guns and laws, but we attack ourselves with sin. And don't forget that in other parts of the world, they very much do visit real destruction upon Christian communities. To them, I know for a fact that a God willing to defend them is a holy comfort.

But to finish out the argument about the Canaanites, the detractor's reply: "Don't bother with 'But they appear later on' - you're missing the point. They were ordered by the very origin of love and compassion to slaughter every man, woman and child."

Ah but they were not ordered to do that, which is my point. That's why they are still there later on, in all cases of "genocide" - they were not ordered to slaughter every man, woman, and child; that's what hyperbole means. 
"I would like to know which cultures today do you feel are evil and barbaric and need to be destroyed? Because it seems to me that you're quite fond of killing your god's enemies? Perhaps I am one of those people as I most assuredly despise your god? Should I be killed?"

I don't have, nor do I want, the right to make that decision, only God can make that decision. Note what happened to the Israelites when they took the ark and marched into battle against the Philistines without God's approval. It turned out very, very poorly for Israel, such that they lost the ark. This is a complicated issue, I will say (I don't mean the obviously inflammatory remarks). We have some psalms, called the "imprecatory" psalms, that are prayers for this kind of martial deliverance. They are reserved for flagrant assaults upon the Church and God's work, but Christians are counseled to always leave room for God's grace. That is always the final word, James 2:13: "…because judgment without mercy will be shown to anyone who has not been merciful. Mercy triumphs over judgment."
	
	So for me, I pray for the deliverance of the world from sin, not for its destruction. Because I was showed mercy, and so I should ask for mercy for others. We are instructed to "Defend the weak and the fatherless; uphold the cause of the poor and the oppressed. Rescue the weak and the needy; deliver them from the hand of the wicked."

Rescuing the weak and needy, delivering them from the wicked… these sometimes require arms and violence. Not always, and the Christ-centered person will seek to avoid violence, but if it comes to it… so it comes to it. Romans 12:18:
"If it is possible, as far as it depends on you, live at peace with everyone."

Now, someone slapping you when you 'turn the other cheek' is more to do with insults. However, when it is just, we are told to defend ourselves from accusations, Luke 12:11–12:
"When you are brought before synagogues, rulers and authorities, do not worry about how you will defend yourselves or what you will say, for the Holy Spirit will teach you at that time what you should say."

Clearly, defending ourselves is appropriate at times. This speaks of words and is directed at the Apostles, but it reveals to us that we are not to lie down and let injustice or evil stand against us. How far does that go? Consult Scripture, pray, and ask other mature Christians in the Church. There is no axiomatic rule, for there is no axiomatic situation with a spherical cow. Oh and, the command is "do not murder," not "do not kill," so no one email me about that. In my conversation with the detractor above, he eventually said this: I would try to destroy anybody who got into my house, but I'm not the one who is guided by some 'higher power.'
	Which spoke volumes to me, frankly. In his view, it was perfectly fine for his personal morality to guide him to defend his property, family, and self, but it is somehow not fine for someone guided by God's perfect standard to do the same. I found that very telling, and one only need think for a few moments how it applies to the entirety of this discussion about martial retribution being used by God. We should stray a moment into Habakkuk. Let's look at the first few verses:
"Lord, how long shall I cry for help, and you will not hear? Or cry to you 'Violence!' and you will not save? Why do you make me see iniquity, and why do you idly look at wrong? Destruction and violence are before me; strife and contention arise. So the law is paralyzed, and justice never goes forth. For the wicked surround the righteous; so justice goes forth perverted."
	
We can't have it both ways. We cannot say, "God's chosen way of getting rid of evil is evil," but then also say, "why does God allow evil to persist?" We cannot say, "I don't like the way God gets rid of evil," while also saying "If there's a God he's sovereign so why doesn't he do anything?" The duplicity is ridiculous. In the main body of the work I focused on the problem of evil, and so I won't rehash that here, but you see the impossibility of satisfying some people. Anyways, in response to Habakkuk, God says he's raising up the Babylonians to execute his judgement (Habakkuk 1:12). See here:
"O Lord, you have ordained them as a judgment, and you, O Rock, have established them for reproof. You who are of purer eyes than to see evil and cannot look at wrong, why do you idly look at traitors and remain silent when the wicked swallows up the man more righteous than he?"

God's response is, in effect, that they will be punished for their wrongdoing later on as well. Again, if your first question is, "why not just get rid of it all right now," that has been answered in the main body of the text. Don't forget that if God simply "got rid of evil," he'd simply get rid of you too, since he shows no favoritism. Instead, he wants us to come to repentance, and so he is patient. 


Special Article N – Is faith a choice or part of the gift? (Calvinism)

This Special Article deals with the question of whether people choose to have faith or not, after the gospel and Holy Spirit do their work in them. (I'll make that blindingly plain: you cannot have faith without God calling to you.) More formally and theologically, the argument mostly hinges upon whether or not faith is a "work" as described in Scripture. I would define work loosely as an action one performs in expectation of a reward or result. Scripture teaches in no uncertain terms that absolutely no work you do can save you. Relying on your works in any way, shape, or form for salvation will get you to one place and one place only: Hell. 
I should also define faith, which Hebrews 11:1 helpfully does for us:
 "Now faith is confidence in what we hope for and assurance about what we do not see."

Thus, the question depends partially on if faith itself is a work. A common question is whether or not faith is part of the gift described in Ephesians 2:8-9. The wording in the Greek does not support that faith is the gift:
"For by grace you have been saved through faith. And this is not your own doing; it is the gift of God, not a result of works, so that no one may boast." 

The issue here is that "this" in the second sentence is neuter in the Greek, and faith is feminine. I won't go too much into this here, but that negates the premise that "faith" is necessarily connected to "this". All the words, in fact, are masculine or feminine; thus, the conclusion is that "this" is referring to the whole phrase, the whole idea: "for by grace you have been saved through faith." "So grace is the gift, saved is the gift, and faith is the gift?" No, that would require "these." It is "this." This is not plural. 
Now, Calvinists such as Voddie Baucham has been known to say, "dead men can't make choices." He is, of course, referencing Ephesians 2 which calls us dead in our trespasses and sins. But what he misses is that this is followed by "in which you once walked": walking is an action. Dead does not mean incapable of action (action is divorced from the Scriptural concept of work). If the Holy Spirit rouses you, you are capable of responding even if 'dead' as Paul describes.
More importantly, what Baucham and others, Calvin himself included, miss is that the gospel is alive. I can summarize this no better : "When Calvinists insist that unregenerate, natural man is spiritually dead, remind them that the Gospel is alive. The Gospel is "living and active" (Hebrews 4:12), gives faith (Romans 10:17), cleans (John 15:3), washes (Ephesians 5:26) contains life (John 6:63) and makes you born again. 1st Peter 1:22-23 states: 'Since you have in obedience to the truth purified your souls for a sincere love of the brethren, fervently love one another from the heart, for you have been born again not of seed which is perishable but imperishable, that is, through the living and enduring word of God.' It also pricks and convicts. (Acts 26:14; John 16:8) Besides this, a man does not receive the indwelling of the Holy Spirit until after he has heard and believed in the Gospel. (Ephesians 1:13; Galatians 3:2)"
There's plenty of Scriptural backing that faith is not a work, Romans 3:27 for starters:
"Then what becomes of our boasting? It is excluded. By what kind of law? By a law of works? No, but by the law of faith." 

	Romans 4:4-5 clearly separates works and faith:
“Now to the one who works, his wages are not counted as a gift but as his due. And to the one who does not work but believes in him who justifies the ungodly, his faith is counted as righteousness,”

	Galatians 2:16 separates the ‘law’, which is all good works, and faith:
“yet we know that a person is not justified by works of the law but through faith in Jesus Christ, so we also have believed in Christ Jesus, in order to be justified by faith in Christ and not by works of the law, because by works of the law no one will be justified.”

Faith is a difference between me and the damned, but what made me different was Christ's work. Faith does not merit anything. The calvinist will say, "man must cooperate with God to be saved so it is a work," but it is not a work, so this is their flawed description of the role faith plays; co-operate has operate within. Trust is not "operating" anything. 
"What about John 6:44? It says no one can come unless the Father draws them." Yeah, of course. No one seeks God on their own. The Holy Spirit does the work, the gospel does the work, I merely assent to it. Certainly, God can override our choice. He is sovereign! He does not need us to do anything. But choosing to trust in the Lord's works is not a work. Calvinists will argue all day that it is a work, but that's simply not supported by the text. 
While Scripture is the final arbiter of all doctrinal matters, think about this rationally: if I have total faith in Jesus, truly, then I cannot possibly have any faith in myself, which means I admit and recognize that I am totally reliant on the effort of the Lord to save me. Again, trying to answer this from reason gets you into all kinds of trouble, so this isn’t an argument I’m making, it’s just something to consider. Scripture is the sole authority on whether or not faith is a work, and it says “no.”
"What about election?" I don't frankly know why so many have so much trouble with this, and yes, election is extremely, plainly-from-the-mouth-of-Christ Scriptural; the solution is very simple: he made me with a will that would say yes when called to by the Holy Spirit, or any other number of explanations that satisfy Romans 9:23. Then there's the example of Jacob and Esau, where God demonstrates he can sovereignly pick whoever he pleases. Jacob and Esau were twins, and the only difference between them at all that humans would find to choose one over the other was that Jacob came out second; God ignored even that!
Calvinists will also say "So you believe grace is resistible?" and call that blasphemy or say that it cheapens God's power. Friends, brothers, sisters, look at Israel in the Old Testament, and look me in the eye and tell me that God does not sovereignly allow us to resist his grace! So, let's continue on to Romans 10:17 which in no uncertain terms tells us the source of faith:
"Consequently, faith comes from hearing the message, and the message is heard through the word about Christ."

Faith comes from the living gospel, interpreted to our spiritually blind deaf and dumb minds by the Holy Spirit. Frustratingly, "comes from" here is ex, from which we ex-otic among other. I probably don't need to tell you that this is not exactly a theologically specific word here, so there's not much of a conclusion that can be drawn from it. It doesn't matter, though, as no matter what sort of definition for "comes from" we mean, it does not say that we inevitably accept that faith. It leaves room for whether or not we accept that faith is our choice. 1 Thessalonians 2:13-14 says the following in support of this conclusion:
"And we also thank God constantly for this, that when you received the word of God, which you heard from us, you accepted it not as the word of men but as what it really is, the word of God, which is at work in you believers."

We see that Paul says "you accepted it." He ascribes agency to the accepting of the word to the individual, and also, says that the word of God is doing the work in us. 


Special Article O – An example of God waiting to punish and cultural justice

	I am not, in this Special Article, going to write an entire treatise on God's waiting to punish sin and why and why that is right. An entire chapter of this work handles that issue. Additionally, one need read very little of the prophet Isaiah (or Scripture in general) to find the cycle of the buildup of the corruptive iniquity of sin before God's wrath comes crashing down, followed by redemption of the remnant and upkeep of the promise. Further, this is not a rehashing of the Special Article concerning inherited guilt, though it may briefly discuss similar topics.
	Here, I intend to discuss one curious example of such: Genesis 15:13-16:
	"Then the Lord said to Abram, 'Know for certain that your offspring will be sojourners in a land that is not theirs and will be servants there, and they will be afflicted for four hundred years. But I will bring judgment on the nation that they serve, and afterward they shall come out with great possessions. … And they shall come back here in the fourth generation, for the iniquity of the Amorites is not yet complete."

	God is, of course, speaking to Abraham, and telling him about the fate of his forebears. Note the last clause though, 'for the iniquity of the Amorites is not yet complete'. What an odd statement! How can God wait for a people's corruption to be "complete" before punishing them? 
	Partly, the resolution is that the Amorites had not yet sinned to such a degree, their culture had not become so violently, disgustingly repulsive to God to warrant their total destruction and dissolution and "vomiting from the land", but that it would four hundred years hence. But we need way more context to isolate this. Genesis 18 where God said he would spare Sodom for increasingly few hypothetical righteous persons, and then in Genesis 19 he does spare Lot from the destruction visited upon Sodom. That example is used all throughout Scripture as typifying God's justice for a reason, and not just because of the awesome power of the destruction, but for the saving of those who were not corrupted enough to warrant that level of calamitous destruction.
	See also Jeremiah 24, whereby God showed the prophet Jeremiah two baskets of figs; one good, and one rotten, inedible. God then explains that the good figs will be preserved through the trials and tribulations of their future captivity in Babylon, and the bad figs, well. Verses 9 and 10 speak for themselves.  
	And here, Isaiah 14:20-21:
	"You will not be joined with them in burial, because you have destroyed your land, you have slain your people. May the offspring of evildoers nevermore be named! Prepare slaughter for his sons because of the guilt of their fathers, lest they rise and possess the earth, and fill the face of the world with cities."

	(This is part of a taunt against the king of Babylon.) What to make of this? On the face of it, it seems like the king's sons are being slaughtered for what their father has done, but it is not so. First, their ages are not given, and this is a generic taunt against the king of Babylon, not a specific one, so we cannot say which king and thereby derive the ages of the sons or anything of the sort. But the solution does not change if they are adults, teenagers, children, or a mix. 
	Much like the question, "Why did God kill infants and children in the flood?" We find that the answer is partially, "because they would have or already were corrupted by the iniquity of their culture." (And of course God did not owe them time on this earth, et cetera, not the focus here.) The sons of the king of Babylon, as stated in the verses, would infect the earth with their hideous culture. Isaiah 14 describes this king as "the man who made the earth tremble, who shook kingdoms, who made the world like a desert and overthrew its cities, who did not let his prisoners go home"; the man who even the trees were happy to be rid of! Trees!  So God says, "no more of those like you."
	
	This is where Exodus 20:5 comes into play:
	"You shall not bow down to them or serve them, for I the Lord your God am a jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the fathers on the children to the third and the fourth generation of those who hate me,"

	Which is the opposite of Proverbs 20:7:
	"The righteous who walks in his integrity— blessed are his children after him!"

	Exodus 20:5 is best kept in its context, of the sin of idolatry. Idolatry is a pernicious, foul thing.  It is so corrupting that it lasts for three or four generations. Note also that it says "the fathers," not "a father." This is a cultural issue, not a specific family one. Again, see Special Article L on the issue.
	Which is all the various context for Genesis 15:16. Phew! Alright, with all that said, what we see is three things:
First, God always leaves room for repentance. We can all be glad we have our lives to repent; God could have struck any Christian down the day before he called them. Any individual Amorite can be expected to have received this as much as anybody, and to have been shown mercy. The Assyrians in Nineveh had this chance, and they took it, and were spared (much to the chagrin of Jonah, of course).
Second, It is up to God when he punishes sin; he decided that he would let the Amorites go for probably more reasons than one, but they would occupy the promised land until it was time for Abraham's descendants to have it, which fit together elegantly. I mention this, though, because Sodom and Gomorrah were both in Canaan; their evil was such that God destroyed them then and there. So this is not that God lets rampant, horrible evil go unchecked endlessly; he allowed a cultural virus to persist until it was proper for it to be removed, and he decided that time was later on than for Sodom and Gomorrah. For instance, Genesis 14:13 tells us:
"Then one who had escaped came and told Abram the Hebrew, who was living by the oaks of Mamre the Amorite, brother of Eshcol and of Aner. These were allies of Abram."

That one of Abraham's allies was an Amorite; thus, we can see they had not been all consumed by evil as they would be when it came time for their destruction. Third, the Amorites were an idolatrous people. Exodus 20:5 just told us the fate of those who are idolatrous. 
Lastly, look at these verses from Luke 13:
"When once the master of the house has risen and shut the door, and you begin to stand outside and to knock at the door, saying, 'Lord, open to us,' then he will answer you, 'I do not know where you come from.' Then you will begin to say, 'We ate and drank in your presence, and you taught in our streets.' But he will say, 'I tell you, I do not know where you come from. Depart from me, all you workers of evil!' In that place there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth, when you see Abraham and Isaac and Jacob and all the prophets in the kingdom of God but you yourselves cast out."

Notice anything? The unrepentant Amorites lost their homeland; God says, "I don't know where you come from." It is speculation, perhaps, that these are truly related, but I still find a poignant truth contained therein, that the sinner, the worker of evil, has no homeland, and if you are not a citizen of Zion you are a citizen of nowhere. It also reinforces the truth that God decides when he closes the door to his own home. Who are we to say, "You should close the door early," or "You should close the door later," or "You should close the door to them," or "You should let me in"? 
